
 This is a good article. Follow the link for more information. Page semi-protected
Napoleon
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
This article is about Napoleon I. For other uses, see Napoleon (disambiguation).
"Napoleon Bonaparte" redirects here. For other uses, see Napoleon Bonaparte (disambiguation).
Napoleon
Portrait of Napoleon in his forties, in high-ranking white and dark blue military dress uniform. In the original image He stands amid rich 18th-century furniture laden with papers, and gazes at the viewer. His hair is Brutus style, cropped close but with a short fringe in front, and his right hand is tucked in his waistcoat.
The Emperor Napoleon in His Study at the Tuileries by Jacques-Louis David, 1812
Emperor of the French
1st reign	18 May 1804 – 6 April 1814
Coronation	2 December 1804
Notre-Dame Cathedral
Predecessor	Monarchy established
Successor	Louis XVIII as King
2nd reign	20 March 1815 – 22 June 1815
Predecessor	Louis XVIII
Successor	Louis XVIII
King of Italy
Reign	17 March 1805 – 11 April 1814
Coronation	26 May 1805
Milan Cathedral
Predecessor	Himself as President
Successor	Monarchy abolished
Protector of the
Confederation of the Rhine
In office
12 July 1806 – 19 October 1813
Predecessor	Office established
(partly Francis II as Holy Roman Emperor)
Successor	Office abolished
(partly Francis I as President of the German Confederation)
President of the Italian Republic
In office
26 January 1802 – 17 March 1805
Predecessor	Office established
(partly Francesco Melzi d'Eril as First Director)
Successor	Himself as King
First Consul of France
In office
10 November 1799 – 18 May 1804
Serving with Jean Jacques Régis and Charles-François Lebrun
Predecessor	French Directory
Successor	Himself as Emperor
More...
Born	15 August 1769
Ajaccio, Corsica, France
Died	5 May 1821 (aged 51)
Longwood, Saint Helena, United Kingdom
Burial	Les Invalides, Paris, France
Spouse	Joséphine de Beauharnais
(m. 1796; div. 1810)
Marie Louise of Austria (m. 1810)
Issue
Detail	Napoleon II
Full name
Napoléon Bonaparte
House	Bonaparte
Father	Carlo Buonaparte
Mother	Letizia Ramolino
Religion	see religion section
Signature


Coat of arms	Firma Napoleón Bonaparte.svg
Grandes Armes Impériales (1804-1815)2.svg
Napoléon Bonaparte (/nəˈpoʊliən ˈboʊnəpɑːrt/,[1] French: [napɔleɔ̃ bɔnɑpaʁt]; Italian: Napoleone Buonaparte; 15 August 1769 – 5 May 1821) was a French statesman and military leader who rose to prominence during the French Revolution and led several successful campaigns during the French Revolutionary Wars. He was Emperor of the French as Napoleon I from 1804 until 1814 and again briefly in 1815 during the Hundred Days. Napoleon dominated European and global affairs for more than a decade while leading France against a series of coalitions in the Napoleonic Wars. He won most of these wars and the vast majority of his battles, building a large empire that ruled over much of continental Europe before its final collapse in 1815. He is considered one of the greatest commanders in history, and his wars and campaigns are studied at military schools worldwide. Napoleon's political and cultural legacy has endured as one of the most celebrated and controversial leaders in human history.[2][3]

He was born Napoleone di Buonaparte (Italian: [napoleˈoːne di ˌbwɔnaˈparte]) in Corsica to a relatively modest family of Italian origin from minor nobility. He was serving as an artillery officer in the French army when the French Revolution erupted in 1789. He rapidly rose through the ranks of the military, seizing the new opportunities presented by the Revolution and becoming a general at age 24. The French Directory eventually gave him command of the Army of Italy after he suppressed a revolt against the government from royalist insurgents. At age 26, he began his first military campaign against the Austrians and the Italian monarchs aligned with the Habsburgs—winning virtually every battle, conquering the Italian Peninsula in a year while establishing "sister republics" with local support, and becoming a war hero in France. In 1798, he led a military expedition to Egypt that served as a springboard to political power. He orchestrated a coup in November 1799 and became First Consul of the Republic.

Napoleon's ambition and public approval inspired him to go further, and he became the first Emperor of the French in 1804. Intractable differences with the British meant that the French were facing a Third Coalition by 1805. Napoleon shattered this coalition with decisive victories in the Ulm Campaign and a historic triumph over the Russian Empire and Austrian Empire at the Battle of Austerlitz which led to the dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire. In 1806, the Fourth Coalition took up arms against him because Prussia became worried about growing French influence on the continent. Napoleon quickly defeated Prussia at the battles of Jena and Auerstedt, then marched his Grande Armée deep into Eastern Europe and annihilated the Russians in June 1807 at the Battle of Friedland. France then forced the defeated nations of the Fourth Coalition to sign the Treaties of Tilsit in July 1807, bringing an uneasy peace to the continent. Tilsit signified the high-water mark of the French Empire. In 1809, the Austrians and the British challenged the French again during the War of the Fifth Coalition, but Napoleon solidified his grip over Europe after triumphing at the Battle of Wagram in July.

Napoleon then invaded the Iberian Peninsula, hoping to extend the Continental System and choke off British trade with the European mainland, and declared his brother Joseph Bonaparte the King of Spain in 1808. The Spanish and the Portuguese revolted with British support. The Peninsular War lasted six years, featured extensive guerrilla warfare, and ended in victory for the Allies against Napoleon. The Continental System caused recurring diplomatic conflicts between France and its client states, especially Russia. The Russians were unwilling to bear the economic consequences of reduced trade and routinely violated the Continental System, enticing Napoleon into another war. The French launched a major invasion of Russia in the summer of 1812. The campaign destroyed Russian cities, but did not yield the decisive victory Napoleon wanted. It resulted in the collapse of the Grande Armée and inspired a renewed push against Napoleon by his enemies. In 1813, Prussia and Austria joined Russian forces in the War of the Sixth Coalition against France. A lengthy military campaign culminated in a large Allied army defeating Napoleon at the Battle of Leipzig in October 1813, but his tactical victory at the minor Battle of Hanau allowed retreat onto French soil. The Allies then invaded France and captured Paris in the spring of 1814, forcing Napoleon to abdicate in April. He was exiled to the island of Elba off the coast of Tuscany, and the Bourbon dynasty was restored to power. Napoleon escaped from Elba in February 1815 and took control of France once again. The Allies responded by forming a Seventh Coalition which defeated him at the Battle of Waterloo in June. The British exiled him to the remote island of Saint Helena in the South Atlantic, where he died six years later at the age of 51.

Napoleon's influence on the modern world brought liberal reforms to the numerous territories that he conquered and controlled, such as the Low Countries, Switzerland, and large parts of modern Italy and Germany. He implemented fundamental liberal policies in France and throughout Western Europe.[note 1] His Napoleonic Code has influenced the legal systems of more than 70 nations around the world. British historian Andrew Roberts states: "The ideas that underpin our modern world—meritocracy, equality before the law, property rights, religious toleration, modern secular education, sound finances, and so on—were championed, consolidated, codified and geographically extended by Napoleon. To them he added a rational and efficient local administration, an end to rural banditry, the encouragement of science and the arts, the abolition of feudalism and the greatest codification of laws since the fall of the Roman Empire".[10]


Contents
1	Early life
2	Early career
2.1	Siege of Toulon
2.2	13 Vendémiaire
2.3	First Italian campaign
2.4	Egyptian expedition
3	Ruler of France
3.1	French Consulate
3.1.1	Temporary peace in Europe
3.2	French Empire
3.2.1	War of the Third Coalition
3.2.2	Middle-Eastern alliances
3.2.3	War of the Fourth Coalition and Tilsit
3.2.4	Peninsular War and Erfurt
3.2.5	War of the Fifth Coalition and Marie Louise
3.2.6	Invasion of Russia
3.2.7	War of the Sixth Coalition
3.2.8	Exile to Elba
3.2.9	Hundred Days
4	Exile on Saint Helena
4.1	Death
4.1.1	Cause of death
5	Religion
5.1	Concordat
5.2	Arrest of Pope Pius VII
5.3	Religious emancipation
6	Personality
7	Image
8	Reforms
8.1	Napoleonic Code
8.2	Warfare
8.3	Metric system
8.4	Education
9	Memory and evaluation
9.1	Criticism
9.2	Propaganda and memory
9.3	Long-term influence outside France
10	Marriages and children
11	Titles, styles, honours, and arms
12	Ancestry
13	See also
14	Notes
15	Citations
16	References
16.1	Biographical studies
16.2	Primary sources
16.3	Specialty studies
16.4	Historiography and memory
17	External links
Early life
Half-length portrait of a wigged middle-aged man with a well-to-do jacket. His left hand is tucked inside his waistcoat.
Napoleon's father, Italian nobleman Carlo Buonaparte, was Corsica's representative to the court of Louis XVI.
The ancestors of Napoleon descended from minor Italian nobility of Tuscan origin who had come to Corsica from Liguria in the 16th century.[11][12] His parents Carlo Maria di Buonaparte and Maria Letizia Ramolino maintained an ancestral home called "Casa Buonaparte" in Ajaccio. Napoleon was born there on 15 August 1769, their fourth child and third son. A boy and girl were born first but died in infancy. He had an elder brother, Joseph, and younger siblings Lucien, Elisa, Louis, Pauline, Caroline, and Jérôme. Napoleon was baptised as a Catholic.[13] Although he was born Napoleone di Buonaparte,[14] he changed his name to Napoléon Bonaparte when he was 27 in 1796 upon his first marriage.[note 2]

Napoleon was born the same year the Republic of Genoa, a former commune of Italy,[18] transferred Corsica to France.[19] The state sold sovereign rights a year before his birth in 1768, and the island was conquered by France during the year of his birth and formally incorporated as a province in 1770, after 500 years under Genoese rule and 14 years of independence.[note 3] Napoleon's parents fought to maintain independence even when Maria was pregnant with him. His father was an attorney who went on to be named Corsica's representative to the court of Louis XVI in 1777.[23]

The dominant influence of Napoleon's childhood was his mother, whose firm discipline restrained a rambunctious child.[24] Later in life Napoleon stated, "The future destiny of the child is always the work of the mother."[25] Napoleon's maternal grandmother had married into the Swiss Fesch family in her second marriage, and Napoleon's uncle, the cardinal Joseph Fesch, would fulfill a role as protector of the Bonaparte family for some years. Napoleon's noble, moderately affluent background afforded him greater opportunities to study than were available to a typical Corsican of the time.[26]

When he turned 9 years old,[27][28] he moved to the French mainland and enrolled at a religious school in Autun in January 1779. In May, he transferred with a scholarship to a military academy at Brienne-le-Château.[29] In his youth he was an outspoken Corsican nationalist and supported the state's independence from France.[27] Like many Corsicans, Napoleon spoke and read Corsican (as his mother tongue) and Italian (as the official language of Corsica).[30][31][32] He began learning French in school at around age 10.[33] Although he became fluent in French, he spoke with a distinctive Corsican accent and never learned how to spell French correctly.[34]

Napoleon was routinely bullied by his peers for his accent, birthplace, short stature, mannerisms and inability to speak French quickly.[31] Bonaparte became reserved and melancholy applying himself to reading. An examiner observed that Napoleon "has always been distinguished for his application in mathematics. He is fairly well acquainted with history and geography ... This boy would make an excellent sailor".[note 4][36] In early adulthood, he briefly intended to become a writer; he authored a history of Corsica and a romantic novella.[27]

On completion of his studies at Brienne in 1784, Napoleon was admitted to the École Militaire in Paris. He trained to become an artillery officer and, when his father's death reduced his income, was forced to complete the two-year course in one year.[37] He was the first Corsican to graduate from the École Militaire.[37] He was examined by the famed scientist Pierre-Simon Laplace.[38]

Early career

Napoleon Bonaparte, aged 23, lieutenant-colonel of a battalion of Corsican Republican volunteers. Portrait by Henri Félix Emmanuel Philippoteaux.
Upon graduating in September 1785, Bonaparte was commissioned a second lieutenant in La Fère artillery regiment.[29][note 5] He served in Valence and Auxonne until after the outbreak of the Revolution in 1789, and took nearly two years' leave in Corsica and Paris during this period. At this time, he was a fervent Corsican nationalist, and wrote to Corsican leader Pasquale Paoli in May 1789, "As the nation was perishing I was born. Thirty thousand Frenchmen were vomited on to our shores, drowning the throne of liberty in waves of blood. Such was the odious sight which was the first to strike me".[40]

He spent the early years of the Revolution in Corsica, fighting in a complex three-way struggle among royalists, revolutionaries, and Corsican nationalists. He was a supporter of the republican Jacobin movement, organising clubs in Corsica,[41] and was given command over a battalion of volunteers. He was promoted to captain in the regular army in July 1792, despite exceeding his leave of absence and leading a riot against French troops.[42]

He came into conflict with Paoli, who had decided to split with France and sabotage the Corsican contribution to the Expédition de Sardaigne, by preventing a French assault on the Sardinian island of La Maddalena.[43] Bonaparte and his family fled to the French mainland in June 1793 because of the split with Paoli.[44]

Siege of Toulon
Main article: Siege of Toulon

Bonaparte at the Siege of Toulon
In July 1793, Bonaparte published a pro-republican pamphlet entitled Le souper de Beaucaire (Supper at Beaucaire) which gained him the support of Augustin Robespierre, younger brother of the Revolutionary leader Maximilien Robespierre. With the help of his fellow Corsican Antoine Christophe Saliceti, Bonaparte was appointed artillery commander of the republican forces at the Siege of Toulon.[45]

He adopted a plan to capture a hill where republican guns could dominate the city's harbour and force the British to evacuate. The assault on the position led to the capture of the city, but during it Bonaparte was wounded in the thigh. He was promoted to brigadier general at the age of 24. Catching the attention of the Committee of Public Safety, he was put in charge of the artillery of France's Army of Italy.[46]

Napoleon spent time as inspector of coastal fortifications on the Mediterranean coast near Marseille while he was waiting for confirmation of the Army of Italy post. He devised plans for attacking the Kingdom of Sardinia as part of France's campaign against the First Coalition. Augustin Robespierre and Saliceti were ready to listen to the freshly promoted artillery general.[47]

The French army carried out Bonaparte's plan in the Battle of Saorgio in April 1794, and then advanced to seize Ormea in the mountains. From Ormea, they headed west to outflank the Austro-Sardinian positions around Saorge. After this campaign, Augustin Robespierre sent Bonaparte on a mission to the Republic of Genoa to determine that country's intentions towards France.[48]

13 Vendémiaire
Main article: 13 Vendémiaire
Some contemporaries alleged that Bonaparte was put under house arrest at Nice for his association with the Robespierres following their fall in the Thermidorian Reaction in July 1794, but Napoleon's secretary Bourrienne disputed the allegation in his memoirs. According to Bourrienne, jealousy was responsible, between the Army of the Alps and the Army of Italy (with whom Napoleon was seconded at the time).[49] Bonaparte dispatched an impassioned defense in a letter to the commissar Saliceti, and he was subsequently acquitted of any wrongdoing.[50] He was released within two weeks and, due to his technical skills, was asked to draw up plans to attack Italian positions in the context of France's war with Austria. He also took part in an expedition to take back Corsica from the British, but the French were repulsed by the British Royal Navy.[51]

By 1795, Bonaparte had become engaged to Désirée Clary, daughter of François Clary. Désirée's sister Julie Clary had married Bonaparte's elder brother Joseph.[52] In April 1795, he was assigned to the Army of the West, which was engaged in the War in the Vendée—a civil war and royalist counter-revolution in Vendée, a region in west central France on the Atlantic Ocean. As an infantry command, it was a demotion from artillery general—for which the army already had a full quota—and he pleaded poor health to avoid the posting.[53]

Etching of a street, there are many pockets of smoke due to a group of republican artillery firing on royalists across the street at the entrance to a building
Journée du 13 Vendémiaire, artillery fire in front of the Church of Saint-Roch, Paris, Rue Saint-Honoré
He was moved to the Bureau of Topography of the Committee of Public Safety and sought unsuccessfully to be transferred to Constantinople in order to offer his services to the Sultan.[54] During this period, he wrote the romantic novella Clisson et Eugénie, about a soldier and his lover, in a clear parallel to Bonaparte's own relationship with Désirée.[55] On 15 September, Bonaparte was removed from the list of generals in regular service for his refusal to serve in the Vendée campaign. He faced a difficult financial situation and reduced career prospects.[56]

On 3 October, royalists in Paris declared a rebellion against the National Convention.[57] Paul Barras, a leader of the Thermidorian Reaction, knew of Bonaparte's military exploits at Toulon and gave him command of the improvised forces in defence of the Convention in the Tuileries Palace. Napoleon had seen the massacre of the King's Swiss Guard there three years earlier and realised that artillery would be the key to its defence.[29]

He ordered a young cavalry officer named Joachim Murat to seize large cannons and used them to repel the attackers on 5 October 1795—13 Vendémiaire An IV in the French Republican Calendar; 1,400 royalists died and the rest fled.[57] He had cleared the streets with "a whiff of grapeshot", according to 19th-century historian Thomas Carlyle in The French Revolution: A History.[58][59]

The defeat of the royalist insurrection extinguished the threat to the Convention and earned Bonaparte sudden fame, wealth, and the patronage of the new government, the Directory. Murat married one of Napoleon's sisters, becoming his brother-in-law; he also served under Napoleon as one of his generals. Bonaparte was promoted to Commander of the Interior and given command of the Army of Italy.[44]

Within weeks, he was romantically involved with Joséphine de Beauharnais, the former mistress of Barras. The couple married on 9 March 1796 in a civil ceremony.[60]

First Italian campaign
Main article: Italian campaigns of the French Revolutionary Wars
A three-quarter-length depiction of Bonaparte, with black tunic and leather gloves, holding a standard and sword, turning backwards to look at his troops
Bonaparte at the Pont d'Arcole, by Baron Antoine-Jean Gros, (c. 1801), Musée du Louvre, Paris
Two days after the marriage, Bonaparte left Paris to take command of the Army of Italy. He immediately went on the offensive, hoping to defeat the forces of Piedmont before their Austrian allies could intervene. In a series of rapid victories during the Montenotte Campaign, he knocked Piedmont out of the war in two weeks. The French then focused on the Austrians for the remainder of the war, the highlight of which became the protracted struggle for Mantua. The Austrians launched a series of offensives against the French to break the siege, but Napoleon defeated every relief effort, scoring victories at the battles of Castiglione, Bassano, Arcole, and Rivoli. The decisive French triumph at Rivoli in January 1797 led to the collapse of the Austrian position in Italy. At Rivoli, the Austrians lost up to 14,000 men while the French lost about 5,000.[61]

The next phase of the campaign featured the French invasion of the Habsburg heartlands. French forces in Southern Germany had been defeated by the Archduke Charles in 1796, but the Archduke withdrew his forces to protect Vienna after learning about Napoleon's assault. In the first encounter between the two commanders, Napoleon pushed back his opponent and advanced deep into Austrian territory after winning at the Battle of Tarvis in March 1797. The Austrians were alarmed by the French thrust that reached all the way to Leoben, about 100 km from Vienna, and finally decided to sue for peace.[62] The Treaty of Leoben, followed by the more comprehensive Treaty of Campo Formio, gave France control of most of northern Italy and the Low Countries, and a secret clause promised the Republic of Venice to Austria. Bonaparte marched on Venice and forced its surrender, ending 1,100 years of independence. He also authorized the French to loot treasures such as the Horses of Saint Mark.[63]


Bonaparte during the Italian campaign in 1797
His application of conventional military ideas to real-world situations enabled his military triumphs, such as creative use of artillery as a mobile force to support his infantry. He stated later in life:[when?] "I have fought sixty battles and I have learned nothing which I did not know at the beginning. Look at Caesar; he fought the first like the last".[64]

Bonaparte could win battles by concealment of troop deployments and concentration of his forces on the "hinge" of an enemy's weakened front. If he could not use his favourite envelopment strategy, he would take up the central position and attack two co-operating forces at their hinge, swing round to fight one until it fled, then turn to face the other.[65] In this Italian campaign, Bonaparte's army captured 150,000 prisoners, 540 cannons, and 170 standards.[66] The French army fought 67 actions and won 18 pitched battles through superior artillery technology and Bonaparte's tactics.[67]

During the campaign, Bonaparte became increasingly influential in French politics. He founded two newspapers: one for the troops in his army and another for circulation in France.[68] The royalists attacked Bonaparte for looting Italy and warned that he might become a dictator.[69] Napoleon's forces extracted an estimated $45 million in funds from Italy during their campaign there, another $12 million in precious metals and jewels. His forces also confiscated more than three-hundred priceless paintings and sculptures.[70]

Bonaparte sent General Pierre Augereau to Paris to lead a coup d'état and purge the royalists on 4 September—Coup of 18 Fructidor. This left Barras and his Republican allies in control again but dependent on Bonaparte, who proceeded to peace negotiations with Austria. These negotiations resulted in the Treaty of Campo Formio, and Bonaparte returned to Paris in December as a hero.[71] He met Talleyrand, France's new Foreign Minister—who served in the same capacity for Emperor Napoleon—and they began to prepare for an invasion of Britain.[44]

Egyptian expedition
Main article: French campaign in Egypt and Syria
Person on a horse looks towards a giant statue of a head in the desert, with a blue sky
Bonaparte Before the Sphinx, (c. 1868) by Jean-Léon Gérôme, Hearst Castle
Cavalry battlescene with pyramids in background
Battle of the Pyramids on 21 July 1798 by Louis-François, Baron Lejeune, 1808
After two months of planning, Bonaparte decided that France's naval power was not yet strong enough to confront the British Royal Navy. He decided on a military expedition to seize Egypt and thereby undermine Britain's access to its trade interests in India.[44] Bonaparte wished to establish a French presence in the Middle East, linking with Tipu Sultan, a Muslim enemy of the British in India.[72] Napoleon assured the Directory that "as soon as he had conquered Egypt, he will establish relations with the Indian princes and, together with them, attack the English in their possessions".[73] The Directory agreed in order to secure a trade route to India.[74]

In May 1798, Bonaparte was elected a member of the French Academy of Sciences. His Egyptian expedition included a group of 167 scientists, with mathematicians, naturalists, chemists, and geodesists among them. Their discoveries included the Rosetta Stone, and their work was published in the Description de l'Égypte in 1809.[75]

En route to Egypt, Bonaparte reached Malta on 9 June 1798, then controlled by the Knights Hospitaller. Grand Master Ferdinand von Hompesch zu Bolheim surrendered after token resistance, and Bonaparte captured an important naval base with the loss of only three men.[76]

General Bonaparte and his expedition eluded pursuit by the Royal Navy and landed at Alexandria on 1 July.[44] He fought the Battle of Shubra Khit against the Mamluks, Egypt's ruling military caste. This helped the French practise their defensive tactic for the Battle of the Pyramids, fought on 21 July, about 24 km (15 mi) from the pyramids. General Bonaparte's forces of 25,000 roughly equalled those of the Mamluks' Egyptian cavalry. Twenty-nine French[77] and approximately 2,000 Egyptians were killed. The victory boosted the morale of the French army.[78]

On 1 August 1798, the British fleet under Sir Horatio Nelson captured or destroyed all but two French vessels in the Battle of the Nile, defeating Bonaparte's goal to strengthen the French position in the Mediterranean.[79] His army had succeeded in a temporary increase of French power in Egypt, though it faced repeated uprisings.[80] In early 1799, he moved an army into the Ottoman province of Damascus (Syria and Galilee). Bonaparte led these 13,000 French soldiers in the conquest of the coastal towns of Arish, Gaza, Jaffa, and Haifa.[81] The attack on Jaffa was particularly brutal. Bonaparte discovered that many of the defenders were former prisoners of war, ostensibly on parole, so he ordered the garrison and 1,400 prisoners to be executed by bayonet or drowning to save bullets.[79] Men, women, and children were robbed and murdered for three days.[82]

Bonaparte began with an army of 13,000 men; 1,500 were reported missing, 1,200 died in combat, and thousands perished from disease—mostly bubonic plague. He failed to reduce the fortress of Acre, so he marched his army back to Egypt in May. To speed up the retreat, Bonaparte ordered plague-stricken men to be poisoned with opium; the number who died remains disputed, ranging from a low of 30 to a high of 580. He also brought out 1,000 wounded men.[83] Back in Egypt on 25 July, Bonaparte defeated an Ottoman amphibious invasion at Abukir.[84]

Ruler of France
Main articles: 18 Brumaire and Napoleonic era
Bonaparte in a simple general uniform in the middle of a scrum of red-robbed members of the Council of Five Hundred
General Bonaparte surrounded by members of the Council of Five Hundred during the Coup of 18 Brumaire, by François Bouchot
While in Egypt, Bonaparte stayed informed of European affairs. He learned that France had suffered a series of defeats in the War of the Second Coalition.[85] On 24 August 1799, he took advantage of the temporary departure of British ships from French coastal ports and set sail for France, despite the fact that he had received no explicit orders from Paris.[79] The army was left in the charge of Jean Baptiste Kléber.[86]

Unknown to Bonaparte, the Directory had sent him orders to return to ward off possible invasions of French soil, but poor lines of communication prevented the delivery of these messages.[85] By the time that he reached Paris in October, France's situation had been improved by a series of victories. The Republic, however, was bankrupt and the ineffective Directory was unpopular with the French population.[87] The Directory discussed Bonaparte's "desertion" but was too weak to punish him.[85]

Despite the failures in Egypt, Napoleon returned to a hero's welcome. He drew together an alliance with director Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès, his brother Lucien, speaker of the Council of Five Hundred Roger Ducos, director Joseph Fouché, and Talleyrand, and they overthrew the Directory by a coup d'état on 9 November 1799 ("the 18th Brumaire" according to the revolutionary calendar), closing down the Council of Five Hundred. Napoleon became "first consul" for ten years, with two consuls appointed by him who had consultative voices only. His power was confirmed by the new "Constitution of the Year VIII", originally devised by Sieyès to give Napoleon a minor role, but rewritten by Napoleon, and accepted by direct popular vote (3,000,000 in favor, 1,567 opposed). The constitution preserved the appearance of a republic but in reality established a dictatorship.[88][89]

French Consulate
Main articles: French Consulate and War of the Second Coalition

Bonaparte, First Consul, by Ingres. Posing the hand inside the waistcoat was often used in portraits of rulers to indicate calm and stable leadership.
Napoleon established a political system that historian Martyn Lyons called "dictatorship by plebiscite".[90] Worried by the democratic forces unleashed by the Revolution, but unwilling to ignore them entirely, Napoleon resorted to regular electoral consultations with the French people on his road to imperial power.[90] He drafted the Constitution of the Year VIII and secured his own election as First Consul, taking up residence at the Tuileries. The constitution was approved in a rigged plebiscite held the following January, with 99.94 percent officially listed as voting "yes".[91]

Napoleon's brother, Lucien, had falsified the returns to show that 3 million people had participated in the plebiscite. The real number was 1.5 million.[90] Political observers at the time assumed the eligible French voting public numbered about 5 million people, so the regime artificially doubled the participation rate to indicate popular enthusiasm for the Consulate.[90] In the first few months of the Consulate, with war in Europe still raging and internal instability still plaguing the country, Napoleon's grip on power remained very tenuous.[92]

In the spring of 1800, Napoleon and his troops crossed the Swiss Alps into Italy, aiming to surprise the Austrian armies that had reoccupied the peninsula when Napoleon was still in Egypt.[note 6] After a difficult crossing over the Alps, the French army entered the plains of Northern Italy virtually unopposed.[94] While one French army approached from the north, the Austrians were busy with another stationed in Genoa, which was besieged by a substantial force. The fierce resistance of this French army, under André Masséna, gave the northern force some time to carry out their operations with little interference.[95]


The battle of Marengo was Napoleon's first great victory as head of state.
After spending several days looking for each other, the two armies collided at the Battle of Marengo on 14 June. General Melas had a numerical advantage, fielding about 30,000 Austrian soldiers while Napoleon commanded 24,000 French troops.[96] The battle began favorably for the Austrians as their initial attack surprised the French and gradually drove them back. Melas stated that he'd won the battle and retired to his headquarters around 3 pm, leaving his subordinates in charge of pursuing the French.[97] The French lines never broke during their tactical retreat. Napoleon constantly rode out among the troops urging them to stand and fight.[98]

Late in the afternoon, a full division under Desaix arrived on the field and reversed the tide of the battle. A series of artillery barrages and cavalry charges decimated the Austrian army, which fled over the Bormida River back to Alessandria, leaving behind 14,000 casualties.[98] The following day, the Austrian army agreed to abandon Northern Italy once more with the Convention of Alessandria, which granted them safe passage to friendly soil in exchange for their fortresses throughout the region.[98]

Although critics have blamed Napoleon for several tactical mistakes preceding the battle, they have also praised his audacity for selecting a risky campaign strategy, choosing to invade the Italian peninsula from the north when the vast majority of French invasions came from the west, near or along the coastline.[99] As Chandler points out, Napoleon spent almost a year getting the Austrians out of Italy in his first campaign. In 1800, it took him only a month to achieve the same goal.[99] German strategist and field marshal Alfred von Schlieffen concluded that "Bonaparte did not annihilate his enemy but eliminated him and rendered him harmless" while "[attaining] the object of the campaign: the conquest of North Italy".[100]

Napoleon's triumph at Marengo secured his political authority and boosted his popularity back home, but it did not lead to an immediate peace. Bonaparte's brother, Joseph, led the complex negotiations in Lunéville and reported that Austria, emboldened by British support, would not acknowledge the new territory that France had acquired. As negotiations became increasingly fractious, Bonaparte gave orders to his general Moreau to strike Austria once more. Moreau and the French swept through Bavaria and scored an overwhelming victory at Hohenlinden in December 1800. As a result, the Austrians capitulated and signed the Treaty of Lunéville in February 1801. The treaty reaffirmed and expanded earlier French gains at Campo Formio.[101]

Temporary peace in Europe
See also: Haitian Revolution
After a decade of constant warfare, France and Britain signed the Treaty of Amiens in March 1802, bringing the Revolutionary Wars to an end. Amiens called for the withdrawal of British troops from recently conquered colonial territories as well as for assurances to curtail the expansionary goals of the French Republic.[95] With Europe at peace and the economy recovering, Napoleon's popularity soared to its highest levels under the Consulate, both domestically and abroad.[102] In a new plebiscite during the spring of 1802, the French public came out in huge numbers to approve a constitution that made the Consulate permanent, essentially elevating Napoleon to dictator for life.[102]

Whereas the plebiscite two years earlier had brought out 1.5 million people to the polls, the new referendum enticed 3.6 million to go and vote (72 percent of all eligible voters).[103] There was no secret ballot in 1802 and few people wanted to openly defy the regime. The constitution gained approval with over 99% of the vote.[103] His broad powers were spelled out in the new constitution: Article 1. The French people name, and the Senate proclaims Napoleon-Bonaparte First Consul for Life.[104] After 1802, he was generally referred to as Napoleon rather than Bonaparte.[39]


The 1803 Louisiana Purchase totaled 827,987 square miles (2,144,480 square kilometers), doubling the size of the United States.
The brief peace in Europe allowed Napoleon to focus on the French colonies abroad. Saint-Domingue had managed to acquire a high level of political autonomy during the Revolutionary Wars, with Toussaint Louverture installing himself as de facto dictator by 1801. Napoleon saw his chance to recuperate the formerly wealthy colony when he signed the Treaty of Amiens. During the Revolution, the National Convention voted to abolish slavery in February 1794. Under the terms of Amiens, Napoleon agreed to appease British demands by not abolishing slavery in any colonies where the 1794 decree had never been implemented. The resulting Law of 20 May never applied to colonies like Guadeloupe or Guyane, even though rogue generals and other officials used the pretext of peace as an opportunity to reinstate slavery in some of these places. The Law of 20 May officially restored the slave trade to the Caribbean colonies, not slavery itself.[105]

Napoleon sent an expedition under General Leclerc to reassert control over Sainte-Domingue. Although the French managed to capture Toussaint Louverture, the expedition failed when high rates of disease crippled the French army. In May 1803, the last 8000 French troops left the island and the slaves proclaimed an independent republic that they called Haïti in 1804.[106] Seeing the failure of his colonial efforts, Napoleon decided in 1803 to sell the Louisiana Territory to the United States, instantly doubling the size of the U.S. The selling price in the Louisiana Purchase was less than three cents per acre, a total of $15 million.[2][107]

The peace with Britain proved to be uneasy and controversial.[108] Britain did not evacuate Malta as promised and protested against Bonaparte's annexation of Piedmont and his Act of Mediation, which established a new Swiss Confederation. Neither of these territories were covered by Amiens, but they inflamed tensions significantly.[109] The dispute culminated in a declaration of war by Britain in May 1803; Napoleon responded by reassembling the invasion camp at Boulogne.[79]

French Empire
Main article: First French Empire
See also: Coronation of Napoleon I and Napoleonic Wars
Colored painting depicting Napoleon crowning his wife inside of a cathedral
The Coronation of Napoleon by Jacques-Louis David (1804)
During the Consulate, Napoleon faced several royalist and Jacobin assassination plots, including the Conspiration des poignards (Dagger plot) in October 1800 and the Plot of the Rue Saint-Nicaise (also known as the Infernal Machine) two months later.[110] In January 1804, his police uncovered an assassination plot against him that involved Moreau and which was ostensibly sponsored by the Bourbon family, the former rulers of France. On the advice of Talleyrand, Napoleon ordered the kidnapping of the Duke of Enghien, violating the sovereignty of Baden. The Duke was quickly executed after a secret military trial, even though he had not been involved in the plot.[111] Enghien's execution infuriated royal courts throughout Europe, becoming one of the contributing political factors for the outbreak of the Napoleonic Wars.

To expand his power, Napoleon used these assassination plots to justify the creation of an imperial system based on the Roman model. He believed that a Bourbon restoration would be more difficult if his family's succession was entrenched in the constitution.[112] Launching yet another referendum, Napoleon was elected as Emperor of the French by a tally exceeding 99%.[103] As with the Life Consulate two years earlier, this referendum produced heavy participation, bringing out almost 3.6 million voters to the polls.[103]

A keen observer of Bonaparte's rise to absolute power, Madame de Rémusat, explains that "men worn out by the turmoil of the Revolution … looked for the domination of an able ruler" and that "people believed quite sincerely that Bonaparte, whether as consul or emperor, would exert his authority and save [them] from the perils of anarchy.[113]"


Napoleon's throne room at Fontainebleau
Napoleon's coronation took place on 2 December 1804. Two separate crowns were brought for the ceremony: a golden laurel wreath recalling the Roman Empire and a replica of Charlemagne's crown.[114] Napoleon entered the ceremony wearing the laurel wreath and kept it on his head throughout the proceedings.[114] For the official coronation, he raised the Charlemagne crown over his own head in a symbolic gesture, but never placed it on top because he was already wearing the golden wreath.[114] Instead he placed the crown on Josephine's head, the event commemorated in the officially sanctioned painting by Jacques-Louis David.[114] Napoleon was also crowned King of Italy, with the Iron Crown of Lombardy, at the Cathedral of Milan on 26 May 1805. He created eighteen Marshals of the Empire from among his top generals to secure the allegiance of the army on 18 May 1804, the official start of the Empire.[citation needed]

War of the Third Coalition
Main article: War of the Third Coalition
Colored painting depicting Napoleon receiving the surrender of the Austrian generals, with the opposing armies and the city of Ulm in the background
Napoleon and the Grande Armée receive the surrender of Austrian General Mack after the Battle of Ulm in October 1805. The decisive finale of the Ulm Campaign raised the tally of captured Austrian soldiers to 60,000. With the Austrian army destroyed, Vienna would fall to the French in November.
Great Britain had broken the Peace of Amiens by declaring war on France in May 1803.[115] In December 1804, an Anglo-Swedish agreement became the first step towards the creation of the Third Coalition. By April 1805, Britain had also signed an alliance with Russia.[116] Austria had been defeated by France twice in recent memory and wanted revenge, so it joined the coalition a few months later.[117]

Before the formation of the Third Coalition, Napoleon had assembled an invasion force, the Armée d'Angleterre, around six camps at Boulogne in Northern France. He intended to use this invasion force to strike at England. They never invaded, but Napoleon's troops received careful and invaluable training for future military operations.[118] The men at Boulogne formed the core for what Napoleon later called La Grande Armée. At the start, this French army had about 200,000 men organized into seven corps, which were large field units that contained 36–40 cannons each and were capable of independent action until other corps could come to the rescue.[119]

A single corps properly situated in a strong defensive position could survive at least a day without support, giving the Grande Armée countless strategic and tactical options on every campaign. On top of these forces, Napoleon created a cavalry reserve of 22,000 organized into two cuirassier divisions, four mounted dragoon divisions, one division of dismounted dragoons, and one of light cavalry, all supported by 24 artillery pieces.[120] By 1805, the Grande Armée had grown to a force of 350,000 men,[120] who were well equipped, well trained, and led by competent officers.[121]

Napoleon knew that the French fleet could not defeat the Royal Navy in a head-to-head battle, so he planned to lure it away from the English Channel through diversionary tactics.[122] The main strategic idea involved the French Navy escaping from the British blockades of Toulon and Brest and threatening to attack the West Indies. In the face of this attack, it was hoped, the British would weaken their defense of the Western Approaches by sending ships to the Caribbean, allowing a combined Franco-Spanish fleet to take control of the channel long enough for French armies to cross and invade.[122] However, the plan unraveled after the British victory at the Battle of Cape Finisterre in July 1805. French Admiral Villeneuve then retreated to Cádiz instead of linking up with French naval forces at Brest for an attack on the English Channel.[123]

By August 1805, Napoleon had realised that the strategic situation had changed fundamentally. Facing a potential invasion from his continental enemies, he decided to strike first and turned his army's sights from the English Channel to the Rhine. His basic objective was to destroy the isolated Austrian armies in Southern Germany before their Russian allies could arrive. On 25 September, after great secrecy and feverish marching, 200,000 French troops began to cross the Rhine on a front of 260 km (160 mi).[124][125]

Austrian commander Karl Mack had gathered the greater part of the Austrian army at the fortress of Ulm in Swabia. Napoleon swung his forces to the southeast and the Grande Armée performed an elaborate wheeling movement that outflanked the Austrian positions. The Ulm Maneuver completely surprised General Mack, who belatedly understood that his army had been cut off. After some minor engagements that culminated in the Battle of Ulm, Mack finally surrendered after realising that there was no way to break out of the French encirclement. For just 2,000 French casualties, Napoleon had managed to capture a total of 60,000 Austrian soldiers through his army's rapid marching.[126]

The Ulm Campaign is generally regarded as a strategic masterpiece and was influential in the development of the Schlieffen Plan in the late 19th century.[127] For the French, this spectacular victory on land was soured by the decisive victory that the Royal Navy attained at the Battle of Trafalgar on 21 October. After Trafalgar, Britain had total domination of the seas for the duration of the Napoleonic Wars.[citation needed]


Napoleon at the Battle of Austerlitz, by François Gérard 1805. The Battle of Austerlitz, also known as the Battle of the Three Emperors, was one of Napoleon's many victories, where the French Empire defeated the Third Coalition.
Following the Ulm Campaign, French forces managed to capture Vienna in November. The fall of Vienna provided the French a huge bounty as they captured 100,000 muskets, 500 cannons, and the intact bridges across the Danube.[128] At this critical juncture, both Tsar Alexander I and Holy Roman Emperor Francis II decided to engage Napoleon in battle, despite reservations from some of their subordinates. Napoleon sent his army north in pursuit of the Allies, but then ordered his forces to retreat so that he could feign a grave weakness.[129]

Desperate to lure the Allies into battle, Napoleon gave every indication in the days preceding the engagement that the French army was in a pitiful state, even abandoning the dominant Pratzen Heights near the village of Austerlitz. At the Battle of Austerlitz, in Moravia on 2 December, he deployed the French army below the Pratzen Heights and deliberately weakened his right flank, enticing the Allies to launch a major assault there in the hopes of rolling up the whole French line. A forced march from Vienna by Marshal Davout and his III Corps plugged the gap left by Napoleon just in time.[130]

Meanwhile, the heavy Allied deployment against the French right flank weakened their center on the Pratzen Heights, which was viciously attacked by the IV Corps of Marshal Soult. With the Allied center demolished, the French swept through both enemy flanks and sent the Allies fleeing chaotically, capturing thousands of prisoners in the process. The battle is often seen as a tactical masterpiece because of the near-perfect execution of a calibrated but dangerous plan—of the same stature as Cannae, the celebrated triumph by Hannibal some 2,000 years before.[131]

The Allied disaster at Austerlitz significantly shook the faith of Emperor Francis in the British-led war effort. France and Austria agreed to an armistice immediately and the Treaty of Pressburg followed shortly after on 26 December. Pressburg took Austria out of both the war and the Coalition while reinforcing the earlier treaties of Campo Formio and of Lunéville between the two powers. The treaty confirmed the Austrian loss of lands to France in Italy and Bavaria, and lands in Germany to Napoleon's German allies. It also imposed an indemnity of 40 million francs on the defeated Habsburgs and allowed the fleeing Russian troops free passage through hostile territories and back to their home soil. Napoleon went on to say, "The battle of Austerlitz is the finest of all I have fought".[132] Frank McLynn suggests that Napoleon was so successful at Austerlitz that he lost touch with reality, and what used to be French foreign policy became a "personal Napoleonic one".[133] Vincent Cronin disagrees, stating that Napoleon was not overly ambitious for himself, "he embodied the ambitions of thirty million Frenchmen".[134]

Middle-Eastern alliances
Main articles: Franco-Ottoman alliance and Franco-Persian alliance

Napoleon I, miniature painting made in 1807 by Jean Baptiste Isabey.

The Iranian envoy Mirza Mohammed Reza-Qazvini meeting with Napoleon I at the Finckenstein Palace in West Prussia, 27 April 1807, to sign the Treaty of Finckenstein.
Napoleon continued to entertain a grand scheme to establish a French presence in the Middle East in order to put pressure on Britain and Russia, and perhaps form an alliance with the Ottoman Empire.[72] In February 1806, Ottoman Emperor Selim III recognised Napoleon as Emperor. He also opted for an alliance with France, calling France "our sincere and natural ally".[135] That decision brought the Ottoman Empire into a losing war against Russia and Britain. A Franco-Persian alliance was also formed between Napoleon and the Persian Empire of Fat′h-Ali Shah Qajar. It collapsed in 1807, when France and Russia themselves formed an unexpected alliance.[72] In the end, Napoleon had made no effective alliances in the Middle East.[136]

War of the Fourth Coalition and Tilsit
Main article: War of the Fourth Coalition
After Austerlitz, Napoleon established the Confederation of the Rhine in 1806. A collection of German states intended to serve as a buffer zone between France and Central Europe, the creation of the Confederation spelled the end of the Holy Roman Empire and significantly alarmed the Prussians. The brazen reorganization of German territory by the French risked threatening Prussian influence in the region, if not eliminating it outright. War fever in Berlin rose steadily throughout the summer of 1806. At the insistence of his court, especially his wife Queen Louise, Frederick William III decided to challenge the French domination of Central Europe by going to war.[137]


Napoleon reviews the Imperial Guard before the Battle of Jena.
The initial military maneuvers began in September 1806. In a letter to Marshal Soult detailing the plan for the campaign, Napoleon described the essential features of Napoleonic warfare and introduced the phrase le bataillon-carré ("square battalion").[138] In the bataillon-carré system, the various corps of the Grande Armée would march uniformly together in close supporting distance.[138] If any single corps was attacked, the others could quickly spring into action and arrive to help.[139]

Napoleon invaded Prussia with 180,000 troops, rapidly marching on the right bank of the River Saale. As in previous campaigns, his fundamental objective was to destroy one opponent before reinforcements from another could tip the balance of the war. Upon learning the whereabouts of the Prussian army, the French swung westwards and crossed the Saale with overwhelming force. At the twin battles of Jena and Auerstedt, fought on 14 October, the French convincingly defeated the Prussians and inflicted heavy casualties. With several major commanders dead or incapacitated, the Prussian king proved incapable of effectively commanding the army, which began to quickly disintegrate.[140]

In a vaunted pursuit that epitomized the "peak of Napoleonic warfare", according to historian Richard Brooks,[141] the French managed to capture 140,000 soldiers, over 2,000 cannons and hundreds of ammunition wagons, all in a single month. Historian David Chandler wrote of the Prussian forces: "Never has the morale of any army been more completely shattered".[138] Despite their overwhelming defeat, the Prussians refused to negotiate with the French until the Russians had an opportunity to enter the fight.


The Treaties of Tilsit: Napoleon meeting with Alexander I of Russia on a raft in the middle of the Neman River
Following his triumph, Napoleon imposed the first elements of the Continental System through the Berlin Decree issued in November 1806. The Continental System, which prohibited European nations from trading with Britain, was widely violated throughout his reign.[142][143] In the next few months, Napoleon marched against the advancing Russian armies through Poland and was involved in the bloody stalemate at the Battle of Eylau in February 1807.[144] After a period of rest and consolidation on both sides, the war restarted in June with an initial struggle at Heilsberg that proved indecisive.[145]

On 14 June Napoleon obtained an overwhelming victory over the Russians at the Battle of Friedland, wiping out the majority of the Russian army in a very bloody struggle. The scale of their defeat convinced the Russians to make peace with the French. On 19 June, Czar Alexander sent an envoy to seek an armistice with Napoleon. The latter assured the envoy that the Vistula River represented the natural borders between French and Russian influence in Europe. On that basis, the two emperors began peace negotiations at the town of Tilsit after meeting on an iconic raft on the River Niemen. The very first thing Alexander said to Napoleon was probably well-calibrated: "I hate the English as much as you do".[146]

Alexander faced pressure from his brother, Duke Constantine, to make peace with Napoleon. Given the victory he had just achieved, the French emperor offered the Russians relatively lenient terms—demanding that Russia join the Continental System, withdraw its forces from Wallachia and Moldavia, and hand over the Ionian Islands to France.[147] By contrast, Napoleon dictated very harsh peace terms for Prussia, despite the ceaseless exhortations of Queen Louise. Wiping out half of Prussian territories from the map, Napoleon created a new kingdom of 1,100 square miles called Westphalia and appointed his young brother Jérôme as its monarch. Prussia's humiliating treatment at Tilsit caused a deep and bitter antagonism which festered as the Napoleonic era progressed. Moreover, Alexander's pretensions at friendship with Napoleon led the latter to seriously misjudge the true intentions of his Russian counterpart, who would violate numerous provisions of the treaty in the next few years. Despite these problems, the Treaties of Tilsit at last gave Napoleon a respite from war and allowed him to return to France, which he had not seen in over 300 days.[148]

Peninsular War and Erfurt
Main article: Peninsular War
The settlements at Tilsit gave Napoleon time to organize his empire. One of his major objectives became enforcing the Continental System against the British. He decided to focus his attention on the Kingdom of Portugal, which consistently violated his trade prohibitions. After defeat in the War of the Oranges in 1801, Portugal adopted a double-sided policy. At first, John VI agreed to close his ports to British trade. The situation changed dramatically after the Franco-Spanish defeat at Trafalgar; John grew bolder and officially resumed diplomatic and trade relations with Britain.[citation needed]


Joseph Bonaparte, Napoleon's brother, as King of Spain
Unhappy with this change of policy by the Portuguese government, Napoleon negotiated a secret treaty with Charles IV of Spain and sent an army to invade Portugal.[149] On 17 October 1807, 24,000 French troops under General Junot crossed the Pyrenees with Spanish cooperation and headed towards Portugal to enforce Napoleon's orders.[150] This attack was the first step in what would eventually become the Peninsular War, a six-year struggle that significantly sapped French strength. Throughout the winter of 1808, French agents became increasingly involved in Spanish internal affairs, attempting to incite discord between members of the Spanish royal family. On 16 February 1808, secret French machinations finally materialized when Napoleon announced that he would intervene to mediate between the rival political factions in the country.[151]

Marshal Murat led 120,000 troops into Spain. The French arrived in Madrid on 24 March,[152] where wild riots against the occupation erupted just a few weeks later. Napoleon appointed his brother, Joseph Bonaparte, as the new King of Spain in the summer of 1808. The appointment enraged a heavily religious and conservative Spanish population. Resistance to French aggression soon spread throughout Spain. The shocking French defeat at the Battle of Bailén in July gave hope to Napoleon's enemies and partly persuaded the French emperor to intervene in person.[citation needed]

Before going to Iberia, Napoleon decided to address several lingering issues with the Russians. At the Congress of Erfurt in October 1808, Napoleon hoped to keep Russia on his side during the upcoming struggle in Spain and during any potential conflict against Austria. The two sides reached an agreement, the Erfurt Convention, that called upon Britain to cease its war against France, that recognized the Russian conquest of Finland from Sweden, and that affirmed Russian support for France in a possible war against Austria "to the best of its ability".[153]

Napoleon then returned to France and prepared for war. The Grande Armée, under the Emperor's personal command, rapidly crossed the Ebro River in November 1808 and inflicted a series of crushing defeats against the Spanish forces. After clearing the last Spanish force guarding the capital at Somosierra, Napoleon entered Madrid on 4 December with 80,000 troops.[154] He then unleashed his soldiers against Moore and the British forces. The British were swiftly driven to the coast, and they withdrew from Spain entirely after a last stand at the Battle of Corunna in January 1809.[citation needed]


Napoleon accepts the surrender of Madrid, 4 December 1808
Napoleon would end up leaving Iberia in order to deal with the Austrians in Central Europe, but the Peninsular War continued on long after his absence. He never returned to Spain after the 1808 campaign. Several months after Corunna, the British sent another army to the peninsula under the future Duke of Wellington. The war then settled into a complex and asymmetric strategic deadlock where all sides struggled to gain the upper hand. The highlight of the conflict became the brutal guerrilla warfare that engulfed much of the Spanish countryside. Both sides committed the worst atrocities of the Napoleonic Wars during this phase of the conflict.[155]

The vicious guerrilla fighting in Spain, largely absent from the French campaigns in Central Europe, severely disrupted the French lines of supply and communication. Although France maintained roughly 300,000 troops in Iberia during the Peninsular War, the vast majority were tied down to garrison duty and to intelligence operations.[156] The French were never able to concentrate all of their forces effectively, prolonging the war until events elsewhere in Europe finally turned the tide in favor of the Allies. After the invasion of Russia in 1812, the number of French troops in Spain vastly declined as Napoleon needed reinforcements to conserve his strategic position in Europe. By 1814, after scores of battles and sieges throughout Iberia, the Allies had managed to push the French out of the peninsula.[citation needed]

The impact of the Napoleonic invasion of Spain and ousting of the Spanish Bourbon monarchy in favor of his brother Joseph had an enormous impact on the Spanish empire. In Spanish America many local elites formed juntas and set up mechanisms to rule in the name of Ferdinand VII of Spain, whom they considered the legitimate Spanish monarch. The outbreak of the Spanish American wars of independence in most of the empire was a result of Napoleon's destabilizing actions in Spain and led to the rise of strongmen in the wake of these wars.[157]

War of the Fifth Coalition and Marie Louise
Main article: War of the Fifth Coalition

Napoleon at the Battle of Wagram, painted by Horace Vernet
After four years on the sidelines, Austria sought another war with France to avenge its recent defeats. Austria could not count on Russian support because the latter was at war with Britain, Sweden, and the Ottoman Empire in 1809. Frederick William of Prussia initially promised to help the Austrians, but reneged before conflict began.[158] A report from the Austrian finance minister suggested that the treasury would run out of money by the middle of 1809 if the large army that the Austrians had formed since the Third Coalition remained mobilized.[158] Although Archduke Charles warned that the Austrians were not ready for another showdown with Napoleon, a stance that landed him in the so-called "peace party", he did not want to see the army demobilized either.[158] On 8 February 1809, the advocates for war finally succeeded when the Imperial Government secretly decided on another confrontation against the French.[citation needed]

In the early morning of 10 April, leading elements of the Austrian army crossed the Inn River and invaded Bavaria. The early Austrian attack surprised the French; Napoleon himself was still in Paris when he heard about the invasion. He arrived at Donauwörth on the 17th to find the Grande Armée in a dangerous position, with its two wings separated by 75 miles (121 km) and joined together by a thin cordon of Bavarian troops. Charles pressed the left wing of the French army and hurled his men towards the III Corps of Marshal Davout. In response, Napoleon came up with a plan to cut off the Austrians in the celebrated Landshut Maneuver.[159] He realigned the axis of his army and marched his soldiers towards the town of Eckmühl. The French scored a convincing win in the resulting Battle of Eckmühl, forcing Charles to withdraw his forces over the Danube and into Bohemia. On 13 May, Vienna fell for the second time in four years, although the war continued since most of the Austrian army had survived the initial engagements in Southern Germany.


The entry of Bonaparte in Schönbrunn, Vienna
By 17 May, the main Austrian army under Charles had arrived on the Marchfeld. Charles kept the bulk of his troops several miles away from the river bank in hopes of concentrating them at the point where Napoleon decided to cross. On 21 May, the French made their first major effort to cross the Danube, precipitating the Battle of Aspern-Essling. The Austrians enjoyed a comfortable numerical superiority over the French throughout the battle. On the first day, Charles disposed of 110,000 soldiers against only 31,000 commanded by Napoleon.[160] By the second day, reinforcements had boosted French numbers up to 70,000.[161]

The battle was characterized by a vicious back-and-forth struggle for the two villages of Aspern and Essling, the focal points of the French bridgehead. By the end of the fighting, the French had lost Aspern but still controlled Essling. A sustained Austrian artillery bombardment eventually convinced Napoleon to withdraw his forces back onto Lobau Island. Both sides inflicted about 23,000 casualties on each other.[162] It was the first defeat Napoleon suffered in a major set-piece battle, and it caused excitement throughout many parts of Europe because it proved that he could be beaten on the battlefield.[163]

After the setback at Aspern-Essling, Napoleon took more than six weeks in planning and preparing for contingencies before he made another attempt at crossing the Danube.[164] From 30 June to the early days of July, the French recrossed the Danube in strength, with more than 180,000 troops marching across the Marchfeld towards the Austrians.[164] Charles received the French with 150,000 of his own men.[165] In the ensuing Battle of Wagram, which also lasted two days, Napoleon commanded his forces in what was the largest battle of his career up until then. Napoleon finished off the battle with a concentrated central thrust that punctured a hole in the Austrian army and forced Charles to retreat. Austrian losses were very heavy, reaching well over 40,000 casualties.[166] The French were too exhausted to pursue the Austrians immediately, but Napoleon eventually caught up with Charles at Znaim and the latter signed an armistice on 12 July.

Map of Europe. French Empire shown as bigger than present day France as it included parts of present-day Netherlands and Italy.
First French Empire at its greatest extent in 1811
  French Empire
  French satellite states
  Allied states
In the Kingdom of Holland, the British launched the Walcheren Campaign to open up a second front in the war and to relieve the pressure on the Austrians. The British army only landed at Walcheren on 30 July, by which point the Austrians had already been defeated. The Walcheren Campaign was characterized by little fighting but heavy casualties thanks to the popularly dubbed "Walcheren Fever". Over 4000 British troops were lost in a bungled campaign, and the rest withdrew in December 1809.[167] The main strategic result from the campaign became the delayed political settlement between the French and the Austrians. Emperor Francis wanted to wait and see how the British performed in their theater before entering into negotiations with Napoleon. Once it became apparent that the British were going nowhere, the Austrians agreed to peace talks.[citation needed]

The resulting Treaty of Schönbrunn in October 1809 was the harshest that France had imposed on Austria in recent memory. Metternich and Archduke Charles had the preservation of the Habsburg Empire as their fundamental goal, and to this end they succeeded by making Napoleon seek more modest goals in return for promises of friendship between the two powers.[168] Nevertheless, while most of the hereditary lands remained a part of the Habsburg realm, France received Carinthia, Carniola, and the Adriatic ports, while Galicia was given to the Poles and the Salzburg area of the Tyrol went to the Bavarians.[168] Austria lost over three million subjects, about one-fifth of her total population, as a result of these territorial changes.[169] Although fighting in Iberia continued, the War of the Fifth Coalition would be the last major conflict on the European continent for the next three years.[citation needed]

Napoleon turned his focus to domestic affairs after the war. Empress Joséphine had still not given birth to a child from Napoleon, who became worried about the future of his empire following his death. Desperate for a legitimate heir, Napoleon divorced Joséphine on 10 January 1810 and started looking for a new wife. Hoping to cement the recent alliance with Austria through a family connection, Napoleon married the Archduchess Marie Louise, who was 18 years old at the time. On 20 March 1811, Marie Louise gave birth to a baby boy, whom Napoleon made heir apparent and bestowed the title of King of Rome. His son never actually ruled the empire, but historians still refer to him as Napoleon II.[citation needed]

Invasion of Russia
Main article: French invasion of Russia

Engraving of 'Napoleon le Grand', ca 1810 from a portrait by Noël François Bertrand
In 1808, Napoleon and Czar Alexander met at the Congress of Erfurt to preserve the Russo-French alliance. The leaders had a friendly personal relationship after their first meeting at Tilsit in 1807.[170] By 1811, however, tensions had increased and Alexander was under pressure from the Russian nobility to break off the alliance.[citation needed] A major strain on the relationship between the two nations became the regular violations of the Continental System by the Russians, which led Napoleon to threaten Alexander with serious consequences if he formed an alliance with Britain.[171]


The Moscow fire depicted by an unknown German artist

Napoleon's withdrawal from Russia, painting by Adolph Northen
By 1812, advisers to Alexander suggested the possibility of an invasion of the French Empire and the recapture of Poland. On receipt of intelligence reports on Russia's war preparations, Napoleon expanded his Grande Armée to more than 450,000 men.[172] He ignored repeated advice against an invasion of the Russian heartland and prepared for an offensive campaign; on 24 June 1812 the invasion commenced.[173]

In an attempt to gain increased support from Polish nationalists and patriots, Napoleon termed the war the Second Polish War—the First Polish War had been the Bar Confederation uprising by Polish nobles against Russia in 1768. Polish patriots wanted the Russian part of Poland to be joined with the Duchy of Warsaw and an independent Poland created. This was rejected by Napoleon, who stated he had promised his ally Austria this would not happen. Napoleon refused to manumit the Russian serfs because of concerns this might provoke a reaction in his army's rear. The serfs later committed atrocities against French soldiers during France's retreat.[174]

The Russians avoided Napoleon's objective of a decisive engagement and instead retreated deeper into Russia. A brief attempt at resistance was made at Smolensk in August; the Russians were defeated in a series of battles, and Napoleon resumed his advance. The Russians again avoided battle, although in a few cases this was only achieved because Napoleon uncharacteristically hesitated to attack when the opportunity arose. Owing to the Russian army's scorched earth tactics, the French found it increasingly difficult to forage food for themselves and their horses.[175]

The Russians eventually offered battle outside Moscow on 7 September: the Battle of Borodino resulted in approximately 44,000 Russian and 35,000 French dead, wounded or captured, and may have been the bloodiest day of battle in history up to that point in time.[176] Although the French had won, the Russian army had accepted, and withstood, the major battle Napoleon had hoped would be decisive. Napoleon's own account was: "The most terrible of all my battles was the one before Moscow. The French showed themselves to be worthy of victory, but the Russians showed themselves worthy of being invincible".[177]

The Russian army withdrew and retreated past Moscow. Napoleon entered the city, assuming its fall would end the war and Alexander would negotiate peace. However, on orders of the city's governor Feodor Rostopchin, rather than capitulation, Moscow was burned. After five weeks, Napoleon and his army left. In early November Napoleon got concerned about loss of control back in France after the Malet coup of 1812. His army walked through snow up to their knees, and nearly 10,000 men and horses froze to death on the night of 8/9 November alone. After the Battle of Berezina Napoleon managed to escape but had to abandon much of the remaining artillery and baggage train. On 5 December, shortly before arriving in Vilnius, Napoleon left the army in a sledge.[178]

The French suffered in the course of a ruinous retreat, including from the harshness of the Russian Winter. The Armée had begun as over 400,000 frontline troops, with fewer than 40,000 crossing the Berezina River in November 1812.[179] The Russians had lost 150,000 in battle and hundreds of thousands of civilians.[180]

War of the Sixth Coalition
Main article: War of the Sixth Coalition

Napoleon's farewell to his Imperial Guard, 20 April 1814
There was a lull in fighting over the winter of 1812–13 while both the Russians and the French rebuilt their forces; Napoleon was able to field 350,000 troops.[181] Heartened by France's loss in Russia, Prussia joined with Austria, Sweden, Russia, Great Britain, Spain, and Portugal in a new coalition. Napoleon assumed command in Germany and inflicted a series of defeats on the Coalition culminating in the Battle of Dresden in August 1813.[182]

Despite these successes, the numbers continued to mount against Napoleon, and the French army was pinned down by a force twice its size and lost at the Battle of Leipzig. This was by far the largest battle of the Napoleonic Wars and cost more than 90,000 casualties in total.[183]

The Allies offered peace terms in the Frankfurt proposals in November 1813. Napoleon would remain as Emperor of France, but it would be reduced to its "natural frontiers". That meant that France could retain control of Belgium, Savoy and the Rhineland (the west bank of the Rhine River), while giving up control of all the rest, including all of Spain and the Netherlands, and most of Italy and Germany. Metternich told Napoleon these were the best terms the Allies were likely to offer; after further victories, the terms would be harsher and harsher. Metternich's motivation was to maintain France as a balance against Russian threats, while ending the highly destabilizing series of wars.[184]

Napoleon, expecting to win the war, delayed too long and lost this opportunity; by December the Allies had withdrawn the offer. When his back was to the wall in 1814 he tried to reopen peace negotiations on the basis of accepting the Frankfurt proposals. The Allies now had new, harsher terms that included the retreat of France to its 1791 boundaries, which meant the loss of Belgium. Napoleon would remain Emperor, however he rejected the term. The British wanted Napoleon permanently removed, and they prevailed, but Napoleon adamantly refused.[184][185]


Napoleon abdicated in Fontainebleau, 4 April 1814, by Paul Delaroche
Napoleon withdrew back into France, his army reduced to 70,000 soldiers and little cavalry; he faced more than three times as many Allied troops.[186] The French were surrounded: British armies pressed from the south, and other Coalition forces positioned to attack from the German states. Napoleon won a series of victories in the Six Days' Campaign, though these were not significant enough to turn the tide. The leaders of Paris surrendered to the Coalition in March 1814.[187]

On 1 April, Alexander addressed the Sénat conservateur. Long docile to Napoleon, under Talleyrand's prodding it had turned against him. Alexander told the Sénat that the Allies were fighting against Napoleon, not France, and they were prepared to offer honorable peace terms if Napoleon were removed from power. The next day, the Sénat passed the Acte de déchéance de l'Empereur ("Emperor's Demise Act"), which declared Napoleon deposed. Napoleon had advanced as far as Fontainebleau when he learned that Paris was lost. When Napoleon proposed the army march on the capital, his senior officers and marshals mutinied.[188]

On 4 April, led by Ney, they confronted Napoleon. Napoleon asserted the army would follow him, and Ney replied the army would follow its generals. While the ordinary soldiers and regimental officers wanted to fight on, without any senior officers or marshals any prospective invasion of Paris would have been impossible. Bowing to the inevitable, on 4 April Napoleon abdicated in favour of his son, with Marie Louise as regent. However, the Allies refused to accept this under prodding from Alexander, who feared that Napoleon might find an excuse to retake the throne.[189] Napoleon was then forced to announce his unconditional abdication only two days later.

Exile to Elba
Cartoon of Napoleon sitting back to front on a donkey with a broken sword and two soldiers in the background drumming
British etching from 1814 in celebration of Napoleon's first exile to Elba at the close of the War of the Sixth Coalition
The Allied Powers having declared that Emperor Napoleon was the sole obstacle to the restoration of peace in Europe, Emperor Napoleon, faithful to his oath, declares that he renounces, for himself and his heirs, the thrones of France and Italy, and that there is no personal sacrifice, even that of his life, which he is not ready to do in the interests of France.
Done in the palace of Fontainebleau, 11 April 1814.

— Act of abdication of Napoleon[190]
In the Treaty of Fontainebleau, the Allies exiled Napoleon to Elba, an island of 12,000 inhabitants in the Mediterranean, 20 km (12 mi) off the Tuscan coast. They gave him sovereignty over the island and allowed him to retain the title of Emperor. Napoleon attempted suicide with a pill he had carried after nearly being captured by the Russians during the retreat from Moscow. Its potency had weakened with age, however, and he survived to be exiled, while his wife and son took refuge in Austria.[191] In the first few months on Elba he created a small navy and army, developed the iron mines, oversaw the construction of new roads, issued decrees on modern agricultural methods, and overhauled the island's legal and educational system.[192][193]

A few months into his exile, Napoleon learned that his ex-wife Josephine had died in France. He was devastated by the news, locking himself in his room and refusing to leave for two days.[194]

Hundred Days
Main article: Hundred Days

Napoleon's return from Elba, by Charles de Steuben
Separated from his wife and son, who had returned to Austria, cut off from the allowance guaranteed to him by the Treaty of Fontainebleau, and aware of rumours he was about to be banished to a remote island in the Atlantic Ocean,[195] Napoleon escaped from Elba, in the brig Inconstant on 26 February 1815 with 700 men.[195] Two days later, he landed on the French mainland at Golfe-Juan and started heading north.[195]

The 5th Regiment was sent to intercept him and made contact just south of Grenoble on 7 March 1815. Napoleon approached the regiment alone, dismounted his horse and, when he was within gunshot range, shouted to the soldiers, "Here I am. Kill your Emperor, if you wish".[196] The soldiers quickly responded with, "Vive L'Empereur!" Ney, who had boasted to the restored Bourbon king, Louis XVIII, that he would bring Napoleon to Paris in an iron cage, affectionately kissed his former emperor and forgot his oath of allegiance to the Bourbon monarch. The two then marched together towards Paris with a growing army. The unpopular Louis XVIII fled to Belgium after realizing he had little political support. On 13 March, the powers at the Congress of Vienna declared Napoleon an outlaw. Four days later, Great Britain, Russia, Austria, and Prussia each pledged to put 150,000 men into the field to end his rule.[197]

Napoleon arrived in Paris on 20 March and governed for a period now called the Hundred Days. By the start of June the armed forces available to him had reached 200,000, and he decided to go on the offensive to attempt to drive a wedge between the oncoming British and Prussian armies. The French Army of the North crossed the frontier into the United Kingdom of the Netherlands, in modern-day Belgium.[198]

Napoleon's forces fought the Coalition armies, commanded by the Duke of Wellington and Gebhard Leberecht von Blücher, at the Battle of Waterloo on 18 June 1815. Wellington's army withstood repeated attacks by the French and drove them from the field while the Prussians arrived in force and broke through Napoleon's right flank.

Napoleon returned to Paris and found that both the legislature and the people had turned against him. Realizing his position was untenable, he abdicated on 22 June in favour of his son. He left Paris three days later and settled at Josephine's former palace in Malmaison (on the western bank of the Seine about 17 kilometres (11 mi) west of Paris). Even as Napoleon travelled to Paris, the Coalition forces swept through France (arriving in the vicinity of Paris on 29 June), with the stated intent of restoring Louis XVIII to the French throne.

When Napoleon heard that Prussian troops had orders to capture him dead or alive, he fled to Rochefort, considering an escape to the United States. British ships were blocking every port. Napoleon demanded asylum from the British Captain Frederick Maitland on HMS Bellerophon on 15 July 1815.[199]

Exile on Saint Helena

Napoleon on Saint Helena, watercolor by Franz Josef Sandmann
Photo of a front garden and large brown building. French flag on a flagpole next to a small cannon.
Longwood House, Saint Helena, site of Napoleon's captivity
The British kept Napoleon on the island of Saint Helena in the Atlantic Ocean, 1,870 km (1,162 mi) from the west coast of Africa. They also took the precaution of sending a garrison of soldiers to uninhabited Ascension Island, which lay between St. Helena and Europe.[200]

Napoleon was moved to Longwood House on Saint Helena in December 1815; it had fallen into disrepair, and the location was damp, windswept and unhealthy.[201][202] The Times published articles insinuating the British government was trying to hasten his death. Napoleon often complained of the living conditions in letters to the governor and his custodian, Hudson Lowe,[203] while his attendants complained of "colds, catarrhs, damp floors and poor provisions."[204] It has been speculated by modern scientists that his later illness arose from arsenic poisoning caused by copper arsenite in the wallpaper at Longwood House.[205]

With a small cadre of followers, Napoleon dictated his memoirs and grumbled about conditions. Lowe cut Napoleon's expenditure, ruled that no gifts were allowed if they mentioned his imperial status, and made his supporters sign a guarantee they would stay with the prisoner indefinitely.[206]

While in exile, Napoleon wrote a book about Julius Caesar, one of his great heroes.[207] He also studied English under the tutelage of Count Emmanuel de Las Cases with the main aim of being able to read English newspapers and books, as access to French newspapers and books was heavily restricted to him on Saint Helena.[208]

There were rumours of plots and even of his escape, but in reality no serious attempts were made.[209] For English poet Lord Byron, Napoleon was the epitome of the Romantic hero, the persecuted, lonely, and flawed genius.[210]

Death
Further information: Death mask of Napoleon and Retour des cendres

Bronze death mask of Napoleon I, modelled in 1821, cast in 1833
Napoleon's personal physician, Barry O'Meara, warned London that his declining state of health was mainly caused by the harsh treatment. Napoleon confined himself for months on end in his damp and wretched habitation of Longwood.[211]

In February 1821, Napoleon's health began to deteriorate rapidly, and he reconciled with the Catholic Church. He died on 5 May 1821, after confession, Extreme Unction and Viaticum in the presence of Father Ange Vignali. His last words were, France, l'armée, tête d'armée, Joséphine ("France, the army, head of the army, Joséphine").[212][213]

Napoleon's original death mask was created around 6 May, although it is not clear which doctor created it.[214][note 7] In his will, he had asked to be buried on the banks of the Seine, but the British governor said he should be buried on Saint Helena, in the Valley of the Willows.[212]


Napoleon's tomb at Les Invalides
In 1840, Louis Philippe I obtained permission from the British to return Napoleon's remains to France. On 15 December 1840, a state funeral was held. The hearse proceeded from the Arc de Triomphe down the Champs-Élysées, across the Place de la Concorde to the Esplanade des Invalides and then to the cupola in St Jérôme's Chapel, where it remained until the tomb designed by Louis Visconti was completed.

In 1861, Napoleon's remains were entombed in a porphyry stone sarcophagus in the crypt under the dome at Les Invalides.[216]

Cause of death
The cause of his death has been debated. Napoleon's physician, François Carlo Antommarchi, led the autopsy, which found the cause of death to be stomach cancer. Antommarchi did not sign the official report.[217] Napoleon's father had died of stomach cancer, although this was apparently unknown at the time of the autopsy.[218] Antommarchi found evidence of a stomach ulcer; this was the most convenient explanation for the British, who wanted to avoid criticism over their care of Napoleon.[212]

Gold-framed portrait painting of a gaunt middle-aged man with receding hair and laurel wreath, lying eyes-closed on white pillow with a white blanket covering to his neck and a gold Jesus cross resting on his chest
Napoleon on His Death Bed, by Horace Vernet, 1826
In 1955, the diaries of Napoleon's valet, Louis Marchand, were published. His description of Napoleon in the months before his death led Sten Forshufvud in a 1961 paper in Nature to put forward other causes for his death, including deliberate arsenic poisoning.[219] Arsenic was used as a poison during the era because it was undetectable when administered over a long period. Forshufvud, in a 1978 book with Ben Weider, noted that Napoleon's body was found to be well preserved when moved in 1840. Arsenic is a strong preservative, and therefore this supported the poisoning hypothesis. Forshufvud and Weider observed that Napoleon had attempted to quench abnormal thirst by drinking large amounts of orgeat syrup that contained cyanide compounds in the almonds used for flavouring.[219]

They maintained that the potassium tartrate used in his treatment prevented his stomach from expelling these compounds and that his thirst was a symptom of the poison. Their hypothesis was that the calomel given to Napoleon became an overdose, which killed him and left extensive tissue damage behind.[219] According to a 2007 article, the type of arsenic found in Napoleon's hair shafts was mineral, the most toxic, and according to toxicologist Patrick Kintz, this supported the conclusion that he was murdered.[220]

There have been modern studies that have supported the original autopsy finding.[220] In a 2008 study, researchers analysed samples of Napoleon's hair from throughout his life, as well as samples from his family and other contemporaries. All samples had high levels of arsenic, approximately 100 times higher than the current average. According to these researchers, Napoleon's body was already heavily contaminated with arsenic as a boy, and the high arsenic concentration in his hair was not caused by intentional poisoning; people were constantly exposed to arsenic from glues and dyes throughout their lives.[note 8] Studies published in 2007 and 2008 dismissed evidence of arsenic poisoning, and confirmed evidence of peptic ulcer and gastric cancer as the cause of death.[222]

Religion
Further information: Napoleon and the Catholic Church

Reorganisation of the religious geography: France is divided into 59 dioceses and 10 ecclesiastical provinces.
Napoleon's baptism took place in Ajaccio on 21 July 1771. He was piously raised as a Catholic but he never developed much faith.[223] As an adult, Napoleon was a deist. Napoleon's deity was an absent and distant God. However he had a keen appreciation of the power of organised religion in social and political affairs, and paid a great deal of attention to bending it to his purposes. He noted the influence of Catholicism's rituals and splendors.[223]

Napoleon had a civil marriage with Joséphine de Beauharnais, without religious ceremony. Napoleon was crowned Emperor on 2 December 1804 at Notre-Dame de Paris in a ceremony presided over by Pope Pius VII. On the eve of the Coronation ceremony, and at the insistence of Pope Pius VII, a private religious wedding ceremony of Napoleon and Joséphine was celebrated. Cardinal Fesch performed the wedding.[224] This marriage was annulled by tribunals under Napoleon's control in January 1810. On 1 April 1810, Napoleon married the Austrian princess Marie Louise in a Catholic ceremony. During his brother's rule in Spain, he abolished the Spanish Inquisition in 1813. Napoleon was excommunicated by the Catholic Church, but later reconciled with the Church before his death in 1821.[225]

Concordat
Further information: Concordat of 1801

Leaders of the Catholic Church taking the civil oath required by the Concordat
Seeking national reconciliation between revolutionaries and Catholics, the Concordat of 1801 was signed on 15 July 1801 between Napoleon and Pope Pius VII. It solidified the Roman Catholic Church as the majority church of France and brought back most of its civil status. The hostility of devout Catholics against the state had now largely been resolved. It did not restore the vast church lands and endowments that had been seized during the revolution and sold off. As a part of the Concordat, he presented another set of laws called the Organic Articles.[226][227]

While the Concordat restored much power to the papacy, the balance of church–state relations had tilted firmly in Napoleon's favour. He selected the bishops and supervised church finances. Napoleon and the pope both found the Concordat useful. Similar arrangements were made with the Church in territories controlled by Napoleon, especially Italy and Germany.[228] Now, Napoleon could win favor with the Catholics while also controlling Rome in a political sense. Napoleon said in April 1801, "Skillful conquerors have not got entangled with priests. They can both contain them and use them". French children were issued a catechism that taught them to love and respect Napoleon.[229]

Arrest of Pope Pius VII
In 1809, under Napoleon's orders, Pope Pius VII was placed under arrest in Italy, and in 1812 the prisoner Pontiff was transferred to France, being held in the Palace of Fontainebleau.[230] Because the arrest was made in a clandestine manner, some sources[231][230] describe it as a kidnapping. The Pope was only released in 1814 when the Allies invaded France. In January 1813, Napoleon personally forced the Pope to sign a humiliating "Concordat of Fontainebleau".[232] The 1813 document was later repudiated by the Pontiff.[233]

Religious emancipation
Further information: Napoleon and the Jews and Napoleon and Protestants
Napoleon emancipated Jews, as well as Protestants in Catholic countries and Catholics in Protestant countries, from laws which restricted them to ghettos, and he expanded their rights to property, worship, and careers. Despite the anti-semitic reaction to Napoleon's policies from foreign governments and within France, he believed emancipation would benefit France by attracting Jews to the country given the restrictions they faced elsewhere.[234]

In 1806 an Assembly of Jewish notables was gathered by Napoleon to discuss 12 questions broadly dealing with the relations between Jews, Christians and other issues dealing with the Jewish ability to integrate into the general French society. Later, after the questions were answered in a satisfactory way according to the Emperor, a "great Sanhedrin" was brought together to transform the answers into decisions that would form the basis of the future status of the Jews in France and the rest of the Empire Napoleon was building.[235]

He stated, "I will never accept any proposals that will obligate the Jewish people to leave France, because to me the Jews are the same as any other citizen in our country. It takes weakness to chase them out of the country, but it takes strength to assimilate them".[236] He was seen as so favourable to the Jews that the Russian Orthodox Church formally condemned him as "Antichrist and the Enemy of God".[237]

One year after the final meeting of the Sanhedrin, on 17 March 1808, Napoleon placed the Jews on probation. Several new laws restricting the citizenship the Jews had been offered 17 years previously were instituted at that time. However, despite pressure from leaders of a number of Christian communities to refrain from granting Jews emancipation, within one year of the issue of the new restrictions, they were once again lifted in response to the appeal of Jews from all over France.[235]

Personality

Napoleon visiting the Palais Royal for the opening of the 8th session of the Tribunat in 1807, by Merry-Joseph Blondel
Historians emphasize the strength of the ambition that took Napoleon from an obscure village to command of most of Europe.[238] In-depth academic studies about his early life conclude that up until age 2, he had a "gentle disposition".[31] His older brother, Joseph, frequently received their mother's attention which made Napoleon more assertive and approval-driven. During his early schooling years he would be harshly bullied by classmates for his Corsican identity and control of the French language. To withstand the stress he became domineering, eventually developing an inferiority complex.[31]

George F. E. Rudé stresses his "rare combination of will, intellect and physical vigour".[239] In one-on-one situations he typically had a hypnotic effect on people, seemingly bending the strongest leaders to his will.[240] He understood military technology, but was not an innovator in that regard.[241] He was an innovator in using the financial, bureaucratic, and diplomatic resources of France. He could rapidly dictate a series of complex commands to his subordinates, keeping in mind where major units were expected to be at each future point, and like a chess master, "seeing" the best plays moves ahead.[242]

Napoleon maintained strict, efficient work habits, prioritizing what needed to be done. He cheated at cards, but repaid the losses; he had to win at everything he attempted.[243] He kept relays of staff and secretaries at work. Unlike many generals, Napoleon did not examine history to ask what Hannibal or Alexander or anyone else did in a similar situation. Critics said he won many battles simply because of luck; Napoleon responded, "Give me lucky generals", aware that "luck" comes to leaders who recognize opportunity, and seize it.[244] Dwyer states that Napoleon's victories at Austerlitz and Jena in 1805–06 heightened his sense of self-grandiosity, leaving him even more certain of his destiny and invincibility.[245]

In terms of influence on events, it was more than Napoleon's personality that took effect. He reorganized France itself to supply the men and money needed for wars.[246] He inspired his men—Wellington said his presence on the battlefield was worth 40,000 soldiers, for he inspired confidence from privates to field marshals.[247] He also unnerved the enemy. At the Battle of Auerstadt in 1806, King Frederick William III of Prussia outnumbered the French by 63,000 to 27,000; however, when he was told, mistakenly, that Napoleon was in command, he ordered a hasty retreat that turned into a rout.[248] The force of his personality neutralized material difficulties as his soldiers fought with the confidence that with Napoleon in charge they would surely win.[249]

Image
Further information: Cultural depictions of Napoleon

Napoleon is often represented in his green colonel uniform of the Chasseur à Cheval of the Imperial Guard, the regiment that often served as his personal escort, with a large bicorne and a hand-in-waistcoat gesture.
Napoleon has become a worldwide cultural icon who symbolises military genius and political power. Martin van Creveld described him as "the most competent human being who ever lived".[250] Since his death, many towns, streets, ships, and even cartoon characters have been named after him. He has been portrayed in hundreds of films and discussed in hundreds of thousands of books and articles.[251]

When met in person, many of his contemporaries were surprised by his apparently unremarkable physical appearance in contrast to his significant deeds and reputation, especially in his youth, when he was consistently described as small and thin. Joseph Farington, who observed Napoleon personally in 1802, commented that "Samuel Rogers stood a little way from me and ... seemed to be disappointed in the look of [Napoleon's] countenance [face] and said it was that of a little Italian." Farington said Napoleon's eyes were "lighter, and more of a grey, than I should have expected from his complexion", that "His person is below middle size", and that "his general aspect was milder than I had before thought it."[252]

A personal friend of Napoleon's said that when he first met him in Brienne-le-Château as a young man, Napoleon was only notable "for the dark color of his complexion, for his piercing and scrutinising glance, and for the style of his conversation"; he also said that Napoleon was personally a serious and somber man: "his conversation bore the appearance of ill-humor, and he was certainly not very amiable."[253] Johann Ludwig Wurstemberger, who accompanied Napoleon from Camp Fornio in 1797 and on the Swiss campaign of 1798, noted that "Bonaparte was rather slight and emaciated-looking; his face, too, was very thin, with a dark complexion ... his black, unpowdered hair hung down evenly over both shoulders", but that, despite his slight and unkempt appearance, "His looks and expression were earnest and powerful."[254]

Denis Davydov met him personally and considered him remarkably average in appearance: "His face was slightly swarthy, with regular features. His nose was not very large, but straight, with a slight, hardly noticeable bend. The hair on his head was dark reddish-blond; his eyebrows and eyelashes were much darker than the colour of his hair, and his blue eyes, set off by the almost black lashes, gave him a most pleasing expression ... The man I saw was of short stature, just over five feet tall, rather heavy although he was only 37 years old."[255]


Napoleon's death mask. Musée de l'Armée, Paris
During the Napoleonic Wars he was taken seriously by the British press as a dangerous tyrant, poised to invade. Napoleon was mocked in British newspapers as a short tempered small man and he was nicknamed "Little Boney in a strong fit".[256] A nursery rhyme warned children that Bonaparte ravenously ate naughty people; the "bogeyman".[257] At 5 feet 2 inches (1.57 m), he was the height of an average French male but short for an aristocrat or officer (part of why he was assigned to the artillery, since at the time the infantry and cavalry required more commanding figures).[258] It is possible he was taller at 5 feet 7 inches (1.70 m) due to the difference in the French measurement of inches.[259]

Some historians believe that the reason for the mistake about his size at death came from use of an obsolete old French yardstick (a French foot equals 33 cm, while an English foot equals 30.47 cm).[258] Napoleon was a champion of the metric system and had no use for the old yardsticks. It is more likely that he was 5 feet 2 inches (1.57 m), the height he was measured at on St. Helena (a British island), since he would have most likely been measured with an English yardstick rather than a yardstick of the Old French Regime.[258] Napoleon surrounded himself with tall bodyguards and was affectionately nicknamed le petit caporal (the little corporal), reflecting his reported camaraderie with his soldiers rather than his height.

When he became First Consul and later Emperor, Napoleon eschewed his general's uniform and habitually wore the green colonel uniform (non-Hussar) of a colonel of the Chasseur à Cheval of the Imperial Guard, the regiment that served as his personal escort many times, with a large bicorne. He also habitually wore (usually on Sundays) the blue uniform of a colonel of the Imperial Guard Foot Grenadiers (blue with white facings and red cuffs). He also wore his Légion d'honneur star, medal and ribbon, and the Order of the Iron Crown decorations, white French-style culottes and white stockings. This was in contrast to the complex uniforms with many decorations of his marshals and those around him.

In his later years he gained quite a bit of weight and had a complexion considered pale or sallow, something contemporaries took note of. Novelist Paul de Kock, who saw him in 1811 on the balcony of the Tuileries, called Napoleon "yellow, obese, and bloated".[260] A British captain who met him in 1815 stated "I felt very much disappointed, as I believe everyone else did, in his appearance ... He is fat, rather what we call pot-bellied, and although his leg is well shaped, it is rather clumsy ... He is very sallow, with light grey eyes, and rather thin, greasy-looking brown hair, and altogether a very nasty, priestlike-looking fellow."[261]

The stock character of Napoleon is a comically short "petty tyrant" and this has become a cliché in popular culture. He is often portrayed wearing a large bicorne hat with a hand-in-waistcoat gesture—a reference to the painting produced in 1812 by Jacques-Louis David.[262] In 1908 Alfred Adler, a psychologist, cited Napoleon to describe an inferiority complex in which short people adopt an over-aggressive behaviour to compensate for lack of height; this inspired the term Napoleon complex.[263]

Reforms

First remittance of the Légion d'Honneur, 15 July 1804, at Saint-Louis des Invalides, by Jean-Baptiste Debret (1812)
Napoleon instituted various reforms, such as higher education, a tax code, road and sewer systems, and established the Banque de France, the first central bank in French history. He negotiated the Concordat of 1801 with the Catholic Church, which sought to reconcile the mostly Catholic population to his regime. It was presented alongside the Organic Articles, which regulated public worship in France. He dissolved the Holy Roman Empire prior to German Unification later in the 19th century. The sale of the Louisiana Territory to the United States doubled the size of the United States.[264]

In May 1802, he instituted the Legion of Honour, a substitute for the old royalist decorations and orders of chivalry, to encourage civilian and military achievements; the order is still the highest decoration in France.[265]

Napoleonic Code
Main article: Napoleonic Code
Page of French writing
First page of the 1804 original edition of the Code Civil
Napoleon's set of civil laws, the Code Civil—now often known as the Napoleonic Code—was prepared by committees of legal experts under the supervision of Jean Jacques Régis de Cambacérès, the Second Consul. Napoleon participated actively in the sessions of the Council of State that revised the drafts. The development of the code was a fundamental change in the nature of the civil law legal system with its stress on clearly written and accessible law. Other codes ("Les cinq codes") were commissioned by Napoleon to codify criminal and commerce law; a Code of Criminal Instruction was published, which enacted rules of due process.[266]

The Napoleonic code was adopted throughout much of Continental Europe, though only in the lands he conquered, and remained in force after Napoleon's defeat. Napoleon said: "My true glory is not to have won forty battles ... Waterloo will erase the memory of so many victories. ... But ... what will live forever, is my Civil Code".[267] The Code influences a quarter of the world's jurisdictions such as that of in Continental Europe, the Americas and Africa.[268]

Dieter Langewiesche described the code as a "revolutionary project" which spurred the development of bourgeois society in Germany by the extension of the right to own property and an acceleration towards the end of feudalism. Napoleon reorganised what had been the Holy Roman Empire, made up of more than a thousand entities,[quantify] into a more streamlined forty-state Confederation of the Rhine; this helped promote the German Confederation and the unification of Germany in 1871.[269]

The movement toward national unification in Italy was similarly precipitated by Napoleonic rule.[270] These changes contributed to the development of nationalism and the nation state.[271]

Napoleon implemented a wide array of liberal reforms in France and across Continental Europe, especially in Italy and Germany, as summarized by British historian Andrew Roberts:

The ideas that underpin our modern world—meritocracy, equality before the law, property rights, religious toleration, modern secular education, sound finances, and so on—were championed, consolidated, codified and geographically extended by Napoleon. To them he added a rational and efficient local administration, an end to rural banditry, the encouragement of science and the arts, the abolition of feudalism and the greatest codification of laws since the fall of the Roman Empire.[272]

Napoleon directly overthrew remnants of feudalism in much of western Continental Europe. He liberalised property laws, ended seigneurial dues, abolished the guild of merchants and craftsmen to facilitate entrepreneurship, legalised divorce, closed the Jewish ghettos and made Jews equal to everyone else. The Inquisition ended as did the Holy Roman Empire. The power of church courts and religious authority was sharply reduced and equality under the law was proclaimed for all men.[273]

Warfare
Further information: Napoleonic weaponry and warfare and Military career of Napoleon Bonaparte
Photo of a grey and phosphorous-coloured equestrian statue. Napoleon is seated on the horse, which is rearing up, he looks forward with his right hand raised and pointing forward; his left hand holds the reins.
Statue in Cherbourg-Octeville unveiled by Napoleon III in 1858. Napoleon I strengthened the town's defences to prevent British naval incursions.
In the field of military organisation, Napoleon borrowed from previous theorists such as Jacques Antoine Hippolyte, Comte de Guibert, and from the reforms of preceding French governments, and then developed much of what was already in place. He continued the policy, which emerged from the Revolution, of promotion based primarily on merit.[274]

Corps replaced divisions as the largest army units, mobile artillery was integrated into reserve batteries, the staff system became more fluid and cavalry returned as an important formation in French military doctrine. These methods are now referred to as essential features of Napoleonic warfare.[274] Though he consolidated the practice of modern conscription introduced by the Directory, one of the restored monarchy's first acts was to end it.[275]

His opponents learned from Napoleon's innovations. The increased importance of artillery after 1807 stemmed from his creation of a highly mobile artillery force, the growth in artillery numbers, and changes in artillery practices. As a result of these factors, Napoleon, rather than relying on infantry to wear away the enemy's defenses, now could use massed artillery as a spearhead to pound a break in the enemy's line that was then exploited by supporting infantry and cavalry. McConachy rejects the alternative theory that growing reliance on artillery by the French army beginning in 1807 was an outgrowth of the declining quality of the French infantry and, later, France's inferiority in cavalry numbers.[276] Weapons and other kinds of military technology remained static through the Revolutionary and Napoleonic eras, but 18th-century operational mobility underwent change.[277]

Napoleon's biggest influence was in the conduct of warfare. Antoine-Henri Jomini explained Napoleon's methods in a widely used textbook that influenced all European and American armies.[278] Napoleon was regarded by the influential military theorist Carl von Clausewitz as a genius in the operational art of war, and historians rank him as a great military commander.[279] Wellington, when asked who was the greatest general of the day, answered: "In this age, in past ages, in any age, Napoleon".[280]

Under Napoleon, a new emphasis towards the destruction, not just outmanoeuvring, of enemy armies emerged. Invasions of enemy territory occurred over broader fronts which made wars costlier and more decisive. The political effect of war increased; defeat for a European power meant more than the loss of isolated enclaves. Near-Carthaginian peaces intertwined whole national efforts, intensifying the Revolutionary phenomenon of total war.[281]

Metric system
Main articles: History of the metric system, Mesures usuelles, and Units of measurement in France
Depicted as First Consul on the 1803 20 gold Napoléon gold coin
Depicted as First Consul on the 1803 20 gold Napoléon gold coin
The official introduction of the metric system in September 1799 was unpopular in large sections of French society. Napoleon's rule greatly aided adoption of the new standard not only across France but also across the French sphere of influence. Napoleon took a retrograde step in 1812 when he passed legislation to introduce the mesures usuelles (traditional units of measurement) for retail trade,[282] a system of measure that resembled the pre-revolutionary units but were based on the kilogram and the metre; for example, the livre metrique (metric pound) was 500 g,[283] in contrast to the value of the livre du roi (the king's pound), 489.5 g.[284] Other units of measure were rounded in a similar manner prior to the definitive introduction of the metric system across parts of Europe in the middle of the 19th century.[285]

Education
Napoleon's educational reforms laid the foundation of a modern system of education in France and throughout much of Europe.[286] Napoleon synthesized the best academic elements from the Ancien Régime, The Enlightenment, and the Revolution, with the aim of establishing a stable, well-educated and prosperous society. He made French the only official language. He left some primary education in the hands of religious orders, but he offered public support to secondary education. Napoleon founded a number of state secondary schools (lycées) designed to produce a standardized education that was uniform across France.[287]

All students were taught the sciences along with modern and classical languages. Unlike the system during the Ancien Régime, religious topics did not dominate the curriculum, although they were present with the teachers from the clergy. Napoleon hoped to use religion to produce social stability.[288] He gave special attention to the advanced centers, such as the École Polytechnique, that provided both military expertise and state-of-the-art research in science.[289] Napoleon made some of the first efforts at establishing a system of secular and public education.[when?] The system featured scholarships and strict discipline, with the result being a French educational system that outperformed its European counterparts, many of which borrowed from the French system.[290]

Memory and evaluation
Criticism

The Third of May 1808 by Francisco Goya, showing Spanish resisters being executed by Napoleon's troops.
In the political realm, historians debate whether Napoleon was "an enlightened despot who laid the foundations of modern Europe or, instead, a megalomaniac who wrought greater misery than any man before the coming of Hitler".[291] Many historians have concluded that he had grandiose foreign policy ambitions. The Continental powers as late as 1808 were willing to give him nearly all of his gains and titles, but some scholars maintain he was overly aggressive and pushed for too much, until his empire collapsed.[292][293]

Napoleon ended lawlessness and disorder in post-Revolutionary France.[294] He was considered a tyrant and usurper by his opponents.[295] His critics[who?] charge that he was not troubled when faced with the prospect of war and death for thousands, turned his search for undisputed rule into a series of conflicts throughout Europe and ignored treaties and conventions alike. His role in the Haitian Revolution and decision to reinstate slavery in France's overseas colonies are controversial and affect his reputation.[296]

Napoleon institutionalised plunder of conquered territories: French museums contain art stolen by Napoleon's forces from across Europe. Artefacts were brought to the Musée du Louvre for a grand central museum; his example would later serve as inspiration for more notorious imitators.[297] He was compared to Adolf Hitler most famously by the historian Pieter Geyl in 1947[298] and Claude Ribbe in 2005.[299] David G. Chandler, a foremost historian of Napoleonic warfare, wrote in 1973 that, "Nothing could be more degrading to the former [Napoleon] and more flattering to the latter [Hitler]. The comparison is odious. On the whole Napoleon was inspired by a noble dream, wholly dissimilar from Hitler's ... Napoleon left great and lasting testimonies to his genius—in codes of law and national identities which survive to the present day. Adolf Hitler left nothing but destruction."[300]

Critics argue Napoleon's true legacy must reflect the loss of status for France and needless deaths brought by his rule: historian Victor Davis Hanson writes, "After all, the military record is unquestioned—17 years of wars, perhaps six million Europeans dead, France bankrupt, her overseas colonies lost."[301] McLynn states that, "He can be viewed as the man who set back European economic life for a generation by the dislocating impact of his wars."[295] Vincent Cronin replies that such criticism relies on the flawed premise that Napoleon was responsible for the wars which bear his name, when in fact France was the victim of a series of coalitions which aimed to destroy the ideals of the Revolution.[302]

British military historian Correlli Barnett calls him 'a social misfit' who exploited France for his personal megalomaniac goals. He says Napoleon's reputation is exaggerated.[303] French scholar Jean Tulard provided an influential account of his image as a savior.[304] Louis Bergeron has praised the numerous changes he made to French society, especially regarding the law as well as education.[305] His greatest failure was the Russian invasion. Many historians have blamed Napoleon's poor planning, but Russian scholars instead emphasize the Russian response, noting the notorious winter weather was just as hard on the defenders.[306]

The large and growing historiography in French, English, Russian, Spanish and other languages has been summarized and evaluated by numerous scholars.[307][308][309]

Propaganda and memory
Main article: Napoleonic propaganda

Napoleon Crossing the Alps, romantic version by Jacques-Louis David in 1805

Bonaparte Crossing the Alps, realist version by Paul Delaroche in 1848
Napoleon's use of propaganda contributed to his rise to power, legitimated his régime, and established his image for posterity. Strict censorship, controlling aspects of the press, books, theater, and art, was part of his propaganda scheme, aimed at portraying him as bringing desperately wanted peace and stability to France. The propagandistic rhetoric changed in relation to events and to the atmosphere of Napoleon's reign, focusing first on his role as a general in the army and identification as a soldier, and moving to his role as emperor and a civil leader. Specifically targeting his civilian audience, Napoleon fostered a relationship with the contemporary art community, taking an active role in commissioning and controlling different forms of art production to suit his propaganda goals.[310]

In England, Russia and across Europe—though not in France—Napoleon was a popular topic of caricature.[311][312][313]

Hazareesingh (2004) explores how Napoleon's image and memory are best understood. They played a key role in collective political defiance of the Bourbon restoration monarchy in 1815–1830. People from different walks of life and areas of France, particularly Napoleonic veterans, drew on the Napoleonic legacy and its connections with the ideals of the 1789 revolution.[314]

Widespread rumors of Napoleon's return from St. Helena and Napoleon as an inspiration for patriotism, individual and collective liberties, and political mobilization manifested themselves in seditious materials, displaying the tricolor and rosettes. There were also subversive activities celebrating anniversaries of Napoleon's life and reign and disrupting royal celebrations—they demonstrated the prevailing and successful goal of the varied supporters of Napoleon to constantly destabilize the Bourbon regime.[314]

Datta (2005) shows that, following the collapse of militaristic Boulangism in the late 1880s, the Napoleonic legend was divorced from party politics and revived in popular culture. Concentrating on two plays and two novels from the period—Victorien Sardou's Madame Sans-Gêne (1893), Maurice Barrès's Les Déracinés (1897), Edmond Rostand's L'Aiglon (1900), and André de Lorde and Gyp's Napoléonette (1913)—Datta examines how writers and critics of the Belle Époque exploited the Napoleonic legend for diverse political and cultural ends.[315]

Reduced to a minor character, the new fictional Napoleon became not a world historical figure but an intimate one, fashioned by individuals' needs and consumed as popular entertainment. In their attempts to represent the emperor as a figure of national unity, proponents and detractors of the Third Republic used the legend as a vehicle for exploring anxieties about gender and fears about the processes of democratization that accompanied this new era of mass politics and culture.[315]

International Napoleonic Congresses take place regularly, with participation by members of the French and American military, French politicians and scholars from different countries.[316] In January 2012, the mayor of Montereau-Fault-Yonne, near Paris—the site of a late victory of Napoleon—proposed development of Napoleon's Bivouac, a commemorative theme park at a projected cost of 200 million euros.[317]

Long-term influence outside France
Main article: Influence of the French Revolution

Bas-relief of Napoleon I in the chamber of the United States House of Representatives
Napoleon was responsible for spreading the values of the French Revolution to other countries, especially in legal reform and the abolition of serfdom.[318]

After the fall of Napoleon, not only was the Napoleonic Code retained by conquered countries including the Netherlands, Belgium, parts of Italy and Germany, but has been used as the basis of certain parts of law outside Europe including the Dominican Republic, the US state of Louisiana and the Canadian province of Quebec.[319] The memory of Napoleon in Poland is favorable, for his support for independence and opposition to Russia, his legal code, the abolition of serfdom, and the introduction of modern middle class bureaucracies.[320]

Napoleon could be considered one of the founders of modern Germany. After dissolving the Holy Roman Empire, he reduced the number of German states from 300 to less than 50, prior to German Unification. A byproduct of the French occupation was a strong development in German nationalism. Napoleon also significantly aided the United States when he agreed to sell the territory of Louisiana for 15 million dollars during the presidency of Thomas Jefferson. That territory almost doubled the size of the United States, adding the equivalent of 13 states to the Union.[321]

Marriages and children
Napoleon's first wife, Joséphine, Empress of the French, painted by François Gérard, 1801
Napoleon's first wife, Joséphine
Empress Marie-Louise and the King of Rome, by Joseph Franque, 1812.
Napoleon's second wife, Marie-Louise
Napoleon married Joséphine de Beauharnais in 1796, when he was 26; she was a 32-year-old widow whose first husband had been executed during the Revolution. Five days after Joséphine's first husband’s death, the Reign of Terror initiator Maximilien de Robespierre was executed, and, with the help of high-placed friends, Joséphine was freed. [322] Until she met Bonaparte, she had been known as "Rose", a name which he disliked. He called her "Joséphine" instead, and she went by this name henceforth. Bonaparte often sent her love letters while on his campaigns.[323] He formally adopted her son Eugène and second cousin (via marriage) Stéphanie and arranged dynastic marriages for them. Joséphine had her daughter Hortense marry Napoleon's brother Louis.[324]

Joséphine had lovers, such as Lieutenant Hippolyte Charles, during Napoleon's Italian campaign.[325] Napoleon learnt of that affair and a letter he wrote about it was intercepted by the British and published widely, to embarrass Napoleon. Napoleon had his own affairs too: during the Egyptian campaign he took Pauline Bellisle Foures, the wife of a junior officer, as his mistress. She became known as "Cleopatra".[326][note 9]

While Napoleon's mistresses had children by him, Joséphine did not produce an heir, possibly because of either the stresses of her imprisonment during the Reign of Terror or an abortion she may have had in her twenties.[328] Napoleon chose divorce so he could remarry in search of an heir. Despite his divorce from Josephine, Napoleon showed his dedication to her for the rest of his life. When he heard the news of her death while on exile in Elba, he locked himself in his room and would not come out for two full days.[194] Her name would also be his final word on his deathbed in 1821.

On 11 March 1810 by proxy, he married the 19-year-old Marie Louise, Archduchess of Austria, and a great niece of Marie Antoinette. Thus he had married into a German royal and imperial family.[329] Louise was less than happy with the arrangement, at least at first, stating: "Just to see the man would be the worst form of torture". Her great-aunt had been executed in France, while Napoleon had fought numerous campaigns against Austria all throughout his military career. However, she seemed to warm up to him over time. After her wedding, she wrote to her father: "He loves me very much. I respond to his love sincerely. There is something very fetching and very eager about him that is impossible to resist".[194]

Napoleon and Marie Louise remained married until his death, though she did not join him in exile on Elba and thereafter never saw her husband again. The couple had one child, Napoleon Francis Joseph Charles (1811–1832), known from birth as the King of Rome. He became Napoleon II in 1814 and reigned for only two weeks. He was awarded the title of the Duke of Reichstadt in 1818 and died of tuberculosis aged 21, with no children.[329]

Napoleon acknowledged one illegitimate son: Charles Léon (1806–1881) by Eléonore Denuelle de La Plaigne.[330] Alexandre Colonna-Walewski (1810–1868), the son of his mistress Maria Walewska, although acknowledged by Walewska's husband, was also widely known to be his child, and the DNA of his direct male descendant has been used to help confirm Napoleon's Y-chromosome haplotype.[331] He may have had further unacknowledged illegitimate offspring as well, such as Eugen Megerle von Mühlfeld by Emilie Victoria Kraus[332] and Hélène Napoleone Bonaparte (1816–1907) by Albine de Montholon.

Titles, styles, honours, and arms
Main article: Titles and styles of Napoleon
Ancestry
Napoleon's ancestry[333]
See also
	Napoleon portal
Arenenberg
Notes
 He established a system of public education,[4] abolished the vestiges of feudalism,[5] emancipated Jews and other religious minorities,[6] abolished the Spanish Inquisition,[7] enacted legal protections for an emerging middle class,[8] and centralized state power at the expense of religious authorities.[9]
 The first known record of him signing his name as Bonaparte was when he was 27 (in 1796).[15][13][16] In his youth, his name was also spelled as Nabulione, Nabulio, Napolionne, and Napulione.[17]
 Although the 1768 Treaty of Versailles formally ceded Corsica's rights, it remained un-incorporated during 1769[19] until it became a province of France in 1770.[20] Corsica would be legally integrated as a département in 1789.[21][22]
 Aside from his name, there does not appear to be a connection between him and Napoleon's theorem.[35]
 He was mainly referred to as Bonaparte until he became First Consul for life.[39]
 This is depicted in Bonaparte Crossing the Alps by Hippolyte Delaroche and in Jacques-Louis David's imperial Napoleon Crossing the Alps. He is less realistically portrayed on a charger in the latter work.[93]
 It was customary to cast a death mask of a leader. At least four genuine death masks of Napoleon are known to exist: one in The Cabildo in New Orleans, one in a Liverpool museum, another in Havana and one in the library of the University of North Carolina.[215]
 The body can tolerate large doses of arsenic if ingested regularly, and arsenic was a fashionable cure-all.[221]
 One night, during an illicit liaison with the actress Marguerite George, Napoleon had a major fit. This and other more minor attacks have led historians to debate whether he had epilepsy and, if so, to what extent.[327]
Citations
 "Napoleon", "Bonaparte". Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.
 Roberts, Andrew. Napoleon: A Life. Penguin Group, 2014, Introduction.
 Charles Messenger, ed. (2001). Reader's Guide to Military History. Routledge. pp. 391–427. ISBN 978-1-135-95970-8. Archived from the original on 22 October 2015.
 Grab 2003, p. 56.
 Broers, M. and Hicks, P. The Napoleonic Empire and the New European Political Culture. Palgrave Macmillan, 2012, p. 230
 Conner, S. P. The Age of Napoleon. Greenwood Publishing Group, 2004, pp. 38–40.
 Perez, Joseph. The Spanish Inquisition: A History. Yale University Press, 2005, p. 98
 Fremont-Barnes, G. and Fisher, T. The Napoleonic Wars: The Rise and Fall of an Empire. Osprey Publishing, 2004, p. 336
 Grab, A. Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe. Palgrave Macmillan, 2003, Conclusion.
 Andrew Roberts, Napoleon: A Life (2014), p. xxxiii.
 McLynn 1998, p. 2
 2012 DNA tests found that some of the family's ancestors were from the Caucasus region; "Le Figaro – Mon Figaro : Selon son ADN, les ancêtres de Napoléon seraient du Caucase!". Le Figaro. 15 January 2012. Archived from the original on 10 February 2012. Retrieved 20 February 2012.; The study found haplogroup type E1b1c1*, which originated in Northern Africa circa 1200 BC; the people migrated into the Caucasus and into Europe. Lucotte, Gerard; Thomasset, Thierry; Hrechdakian, Peter (December 2011). "Haplogroup of the Y Chromosome of Napoléon the First; Gerard Lucotte, Thierry Thomasset, Peter Hrechdakian; Journal of Molecular Biology Research". Journal of Molecular Biology Research. 1. doi:10.5539/jmbr.v1n1p12.
 Dwyer 2008, ch 1
 "6 Things You Should Know About Napoleon". History.com. Archived from the original on 1 July 2017. Retrieved 23 January 2018.
 Roberts, Andrew (2011). Napoleon: A Life. Penguin. ISBN 978-0698176287.
 "Napoleon I | Biography, Achievements, & Facts". Encyclopedia Britannica. Archived from the original on 12 January 2018. Retrieved 23 January 2018.
 Dwyer 2008, p. xv
 Encyclopædia Britannica. "Genoa-Italy". Britannica.com. Archived from the original on 30 July 2017. Retrieved 16 February 2018.
 McLynn 1998, p. 6
 McLynn 1998, p. 20
 "Corsica | History, Geography, & Points of Interest". Encyclopedia Britannica. Archived from the original on 28 November 2017. Retrieved 23 January 2018.
 Roberts, Andrew (2014). Napoleon: A Life. Penguin. ISBN 978-0698176287. Archived from the original on 25 February 2018.
 Cronin 1994, pp. 20–21
 Cronin 1994, pp. 20–21
 Chamberlain, Alexander (1896). The Child and Childhood in Folk Thought: (The Child in Primative Culture), p. 385. MacMillan.
 Cronin 1994, p. 27
 International School History (8 February 2012), Napoleon's Rise to Power, archived from the original on 8 May 2015, retrieved 29 January 2018
 Johnson, Paul (2006). Napoleon: A Life. Penguin. ISBN 978-0143037453. Archived from the original on 25 February 2018.
 Roberts 2001, p. xvi
 Roberts, Andrew (4 November 2011). Napoleon: A Life. Penguin. ISBN 9780698176287.
 Parker, Harold T. (1971). "The Formation of Napoleon's Personality: An Exploratory Essay". French Historical Studies. 7 (1): 6–26. doi:10.2307/286104. JSTOR 286104.
 Adams, Michael (2014). Napoleon and Russia. A&C Black. ISBN 978-0826442123. Archived from the original on 25 February 2018.
 Roberts, Andrew (2014). Napoleon: A Life. Penguin. p. 11. ISBN 978-0698176287. ...having mastered [basic] French in April 1779, four months shy of his 10th birthday...
 McLynn 1998, p. 18
 Wells 1992, p. 74
 McLynn 1998, p. 21
 Dwyer 2008, p. 42
 McLynn 1998, p. 26
 McLynn 1998, p. 290
 McLynn 1998, p. 37
 David Nicholls (1999). Napoleon: A Biographical Companion. ABC-CLIO. p. 131. ISBN 978-0874369571. Archived from the original on 25 February 2018.
 McLynn 1998, p. 55
 McLynn 1998, p. 61
 Roberts 2001, p. xviii
 Dwyer 2008, p. 132
 McLynn 1998, p. 76
 Chandler 1973, p. 30
 Patrice Gueniffey, Bonaparte: 1769–1802 (Harvard UP, 2015), pp. 137–59.
 Bourrienne, Memoirs of Napoleon, p. 39
 Bourrienne, Memoirs of Napoleon, p. 38
 Dwyer 2008, p. 157
 McLynn 1998, pp. 76, 84
 McLynn 1998, p. 92
 Dwyer 2008, p. 26
 Dwyer 2008, p. 164
 McLynn 1998, p. 93
 McLynn 1998, p. 96
 Johnson 2002, p. 27
 Carlyle, Thomas (1896). "The works of Thomas Carlyle – The French Revolution, vol. III, book 3.VII". Archived from the original on 20 March 2015.
 Englund (2010) pp. 92–94
 Bell 2015, p. 29.
 Dwyer 2008, pp. 284–85
 McLynn 1998, p. 132
 McLynn 1998, p. 145
 McLynn 1998, p. 142
 Harvey 2006, p. 179
 McLynn 1998, p. 135
 Dwyer 2008, p. 306
 Dwyer 2008, p. 305
 Bell 2015, p. 30.
 Dwyer 2008, p. 322
 Watson 2003, pp. 13–14
 Amini 2000, p. 12
 Dwyer 2008, p. 342
 Englund (2010) pp. 127–28
 McLynn 1998, p. 175
 McLynn 1998, p. 179
 Dwyer 2008, p. 372
 Roberts 2001, p. xx
 Dwyer 2008, p. 392
 Dwyer 2008, pp. 411–24
 McLynn 1998, p. 189
 Gueniffey, Bonaparte: 1769–1802 pp. 500–02.
 Dwyer 2008, p. 442
 Connelly 2006, p. 57
 Dwyer 2008, p. 444
 Dwyer 2008, p. 455
 François Furet, The French Revolution, 1770–1814 (1996), p. 212
 Georges Lefebvre, Napoleon from 18 Brumaire to Tilsit 1799–1807 (1969), pp. 60–68
 Lyons 1994, p. 111
 Lefebvre, Napoleon from 18 Brumaire to Tilsit 1799–1807 (1969), pp. 71–92
 Holt, Lucius Hudson; Chilton, Alexander Wheeler (1919). A Brief History of Europe from 1789–1815. Macmillan. Archived from the original on 4 May 2016.
 Chandler 2002, p. 51
 Chandler 1966, pp. 279–81
 McLynn 1998, p. 235
 Chandler 1966, p. 292
 Chandler 1966, p. 293
 Chandler 1966, p. 296
 Chandler 1966, pp. 298–304
 Chandler 1966, p. 301
 Schom 1997, p. 302
 Lyons 1994, pp. 111–14
 Lyons 1994, p. 113
 Edwards 1999, p. 55
 Roberts, Andrew. Napoleon: A Life. Penguin Group, 2014, p. 301
 Roberts, Andrew. Napoleon: A Life. Penguin Group, 2014, p. 303
 Connelly 2006, p. 70
 R.B. Mowat, The Diplomacy of Napoleon (1924) is a survey online; for a recent advanced diplomatic history, see Paul W. Schroeder, The Transformation of European Politics 1763–1848 (Oxford U.P. 1996) pp. 177–560
 McLynn 1998, p. 265
 McLynn 1998, p. 243
 McLynn 1998, p. 296
 McLynn 1998, p. 297
 De Rémusat, Claire Elisabeth, Memoirs of Madame De Rémusat, 1802–1808 Volume 1, HardPress Publishing, 2012, 542 pp., ISBN 978-1290517478.
 Roberts, Andrew. Napoleon: A Life. Penguin Group, 2014, p. 355.
 Paul W. Schroeder, The Transformation of European Politics 1763–1848 (1996) pp. 231–86
 Chandler 1966, p. 328. Meanwhile, French territorial rearrangements in Germany occurred without Russian consultation and Napoleon's annexations in the Po valley increasingly strained relations between the two.
 Chandler 1966, p. 331
 Chandler 1966, p. 323
 Chandler 1966, p. 332
 Chandler 1966, p. 333
 Michael J. Hughes, Forging Napoleon's Grande Armée: Motivation, Military Culture, and Masculinity in the French Army, 1800–1808 (NYU Press, 2012).
 McLynn 1998, p. 321
 McLynn 1998, p. 332
 Richard Brooks (editor), Atlas of World Military History. p. 108
 Andrew Uffindell, Great Generals of the Napoleonic Wars. p. 15
 Richard Brooks (editor), Atlas of World Military History. p. 156.
 Richard Brooks (editor), Atlas of World Military History. p. 156. "It is a historical cliché to compare the Schlieffen Plan with Hannibal's tactical envelopment at Cannae (216 BC); Schlieffen owed more to Napoleon's strategic maneuver on Ulm (1805)".
 David G. Chandler, The Campaigns of Napoleon. p. 407
 Adrian Gilbert (2000). The Encyclopedia of Warfare: From Earliest Time to the Present Day. Taylor & Francis. p. 133. ISBN 978-1-57958-216-6. Archived from the original on 29 July 2014. Retrieved 11 July 2014.
 Adrian Gilbert (2000). The Encyclopedia of Warfare: From Earliest Time to the Present Day. Taylor & Francis. p. 133. ISBN 978-1-57958-216-6. Archived from the original on 29 July 2014. Retrieved 11 July 2014.
 Adrian Gilbert (2000). The Encyclopedia of Warfare: From Earliest Time to the Present Day. Taylor & Francis. p. 133. ISBN 978-1-57958-216-6. Archived from the original on 29 July 2014. Retrieved 11 July 2014.
 Schom 1997, p. 414
 McLynn 1998, p. 350
 Cronin 1994, p. 344
 Karsh 2001, p. 12
 Sicker 2001, p. 99.
 Michael V. Leggiere (2015). Napoleon and Berlin: The Franco-Prussian War in North Germany, 1813. p. 9. ISBN 978-0806180175. Archived from the original on 18 November 2016.
 Chandler 1966, pp. 467–68
 Brooks 2000, p. 110
 Brooks 2000, p. 110
 Brooks 2000, p. 110
 McLynn 1998, p. 497
 Jacques Godechot et al. Napoleonic Era in Europe (1971) pp. 126–39
 McLynn 1998, p. 370
 August Fournier (1911). Napoleon I.: A Biography. p. 459. Archived from the original on 18 November 2016.
 August Fournier (1911). Napoleon I.: A Biography. p. 459. Archived from the original on 18 November 2016.
 Roberts 2014, pp. 458–59.
 Roberts 2014, pp. 459–61.
 Horne, Alistair (1997). How Far From Austerlitz? Napoleon 1805–1815. Pan Macmillan. p. 238. ISBN 978-1743285404. Archived from the original on 25 February 2018.
 Todd Fisher & Gregory Fremont-Barnes, The Napoleonic Wars: The Rise and Fall of an Empire. p. 197.
 Fisher & Fremont-Barnes pp. 198–99.
 Fisher & Fremont-Barnes p. 199.
 "The Erfurt Convention 1808". Napoleon-series.org. Archived from the original on 21 October 2013. Retrieved 22 April 2013.
 Fisher & Fremont-Barnes p. 205.
 Chandler 1966, pp. 659–60
 Chandler 1966, pp. 659–60
 John Lynch, Caudillos in Spanish America 1800–1850. Oxford: Clarendon Press 1992, pp. 402–03.
 Fisher & Fremont-Barnes, p. 106.
 Chandler 1966, p. 690
 Chandler 1966, p. 701
 Chandler 1966, p. 705
 Chandler 1966, p. 706
 Chandler 1966, p. 707
 David G. Chandler, The Campaigns of Napoleon. p. 708
 David G. Chandler, The Campaigns of Napoleon. p. 720
 David G. Chandler, The Campaigns of Napoleon. p. 729
 "The British Expeditionary Force to Walcheren: 1809". napoleon-series.org. Archived from the original on 18 July 2011.
 Todd Fisher & Gregory Fremont-Barnes, The Napoleonic Wars: The Rise and Fall of an Empire. p. 144.
 David G. Chandler, The Campaigns of Napoleon. p. 732.
 McLynn 1998, p. 378
 McLynn 1998, p. 495
 McLynn 1998, p. 507
 McLynn 1998, p. 506
 McLynn 1998, pp. 504–05
 Harvey 2006, p. 773
 McLynn 1998, p. 518
 Markham 1988, p. 194
 "Napoleon1812". napoleon-1812.nl. Archived from the original on 13 February 2016.
 Markham 1988, pp. 190, 199
 McLynn 1998, p. 541
 McLynn 1998, p. 549
 McLynn 1998, p. 565
 Chandler 1995, p. 1020
 Riley, J.P. (2013). Napoleon and the World War of 1813: Lessons in Coalition Warfighting. Routledge. p. 206. ISBN 978-1136321351. Archived from the original on 23 September 2015.
 Leggiere (2007). The Fall of Napoleon: Volume 1, The Allied Invasion of France, 1813–1814. pp. 53–54. ISBN 978-0521875424. Archived from the original on 21 September 2015.
 Fremont-Barnes 2004, p. 14
 McLynn 1998, p. 585
 Gates 2003, p. 259.
 Lieven, Dominic (2010). Russia Against Napoleon: The True Story of the Campaigns of War and Peace. Penguin. pp. 484–85. ISBN 978-1101429389. Archived from the original on 20 March 2015.
 "Napoleon's act of abdication". Bulletin des lois de la Republique Française. July 1814. Archived from the original on 22 December 2011. Retrieved 28 August 2009.
 McLynn 1998, pp. 593–94
 McLynn 1998, p. 597
 Latson, Jennifer. "Why Napoleon Probably Should Have Just Stayed in Exile the First Time". Archived from the original on 25 June 2016.
 "PBS – Napoleon: Napoleon and Josephine". Archived from the original on 21 August 2017.
 McLynn 1998, p. 604
 McLynn 1998, p. 605
 McLynn 1998, p. 607
 Chesney 2006, p. 35
 Cordingly 2004, p. 254
 Cox, Dale (2015). Nicolls' outpost : a War of 1812 fort at Chattahoochee, Florida. Old Kitchen Books. p. 87. ISBN 978-0692379363.
 Hibbert, Christopher (2003). Napoleon's Women. W.W. Norton & Company. p. 272. ISBN 978-0393324990. Retrieved 5 April 2018.
 Information, Reed Business (28 October 1982). "Napoleon's moulds". New Scientist: 257.
 Schom 1997, pp. 769–70
 "Two Days at Saint Helena". The Spirit of the English Magazines: Monroe and Francis. 1832: 402. Retrieved 5 April 2018.
 Jones, David (14 October 1982). "The Singular Case of Napoleon's Wallpaper". New Scientist: 101.
 McLynn 1998, p. 642
 I, Napoleon; Marchand, Louis Joseph (29 October 2017). Chronicles of Caesar's Wars: The First-Ever Translation. Translated by Barzani, Arshan (1 ed.). Clio Books. Archived from the original on 3 December 2017.
 Hicks, Peter. "Napoleon's English Lessons". Napoleon.org. Archived from the original on 18 September 2016. Retrieved 24 March 2018.
 Wilkins 1972
 McLynn 1998, p. 651
 Albert Benhamou, Inside Longwood – Barry O'Meara's clandestine letters Archived 11 December 2012 at the Wayback Machine, 2012
 McLynn 1998, p. 655
 Roberts, Napoleon (2014) 799–801
 Wilson 1975, pp. 293–95
 Fulghum 2007
 Driskel 1993, p. 168
 McLynn 1998, p. 656
 Johnson 2002, pp. 180–81
 Cullen 2008, pp. 146–48
 Cullen 2008, p. 156
 Cullen 2008, p. 50
 Cullen 2008, p. 161, and Hindmarsh et al. 2008, p. 2092
 "L'Empire et le Saint-Siège". Napoleon.org. Archived from the original on 19 September 2011. Retrieved 15 June 2011.
 "Napoleon's "divorce"". Archived from the original on 21 January 2018. Retrieved 20 January 2018.
 catholictextbookproject.com
 William Roberts, "Napoleon, the Concordat of 1801, and Its Consequences". in by Frank J. Coppa, ed., Controversial Concordats: The Vatican's Relations with Napoleon, Mussolini, and Hitler (1999) pp. 34–80.
 Nigel Aston, Religion and revolution in France, 1780–1804 (Catholic University of America Press, 2000) pp. 279–315
 Nigel Aston, Christianity and revolutionary Europe, 1750–1830 (Cambridge University Press, 2002) pp. 261–62.
 Luis Granados (2012). Damned Good Company. Humanist Press. pp. 182–83. ISBN 978-0931779244. Archived from the original on 22 September 2015.
 "When Napoleon Captured the Pope". The New York Times. 1981-12-13. Archived from the original on 21 January 2018. Retrieved 30 January 2018.
 "Napoleon and the Pope: From the Concordat to the Excommunication". Archived from the original on 24 January 2018. Retrieved 23 January 2018.
 "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 21 January 2018. Retrieved 20 January 2018.
 "Pius VII | pope". Archived from the original on 2 May 2016. Retrieved 6 May 2017.
 McLynn 1998, p. 436
 Green, David B. (9 February 2014). "This Day in Jewish History / The Sanhedrin of Paris Convenes at the Behest of Napoleon". Haaretz. Archived from the original on 1 December 2017. Retrieved 21 November 2017.
 Schwarzfuchs 1979, p. 50
 Cronin 1994, p. 315
 Pieter Geyl, Napoleon, For and Against (1982)
 George F.E. Rudé (1988). The French Revolution. Grove Weidenfeld. p. 128. ISBN 978-0-8021-3272-7. Archived from the original on 26 September 2015.
 Jack Coggins (1966). Soldiers And Warriors: An Illustrated History. Courier Dover Publications. p. 187. ISBN 978-0-486-45257-9.
 Sally Waller (2002). France in Revolution, 1776–1830. Heinemann. p. 188. ISBN 978-0-435-32732-3.
 See David Chandler, "General Introduction" to his The Campaigns of Napoleon: The Mind and Method of History's Greatest Soldier (1975).
 Roberts, Napoleon: A Life (2014) pp. 470–73
 Gregory R. Copley (2007). The Art of Victory: Strategies for Personal Success and Global Survival in a Changing World. Simon and Schuster. p. 97. ISBN 978-1-4165-2478-6.
 Dwyer 2013, pp. 175–76
 J. M. Thompson, Napoleon Bonaparte: His Rise and Fall (1954), p. 285
 Christopher Hibbert (1999). Wellington: A Personal History. Da Capo Press. p. 171. ISBN 978-0-7382-0148-1.
 McLynn 1998, p. 357
 Steven Englund, Napoleon: A Political Life (2004), pp. 379ff
 van Crevald, Martin (1987). Command in War. Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. p. 64. ISBN 978-0-674-14441-5.
 "Napoleon Bonaparte (Character)". Internet Movie Database. Archived from the original on 6 December 2008. Retrieved 12 October 2008. and Bell 2007, p. 13
 The Fortnightly, Volume 114. Chapman and Hall, 1923. p. 836.
 Louis Antoine Fauvelet de Bourrienne. "Memoirs of Napoleon Bonaparte." Charles Scribner's Sons, 1889. Vol. 1, p. 7.
 Kircheisen, F. M. Napoleon New York : Harcourt, Brace, 1932
 Davydov, Denis. In the Service of the Tsar Against Napoleon: The Memoirs of Denis Davydov, 1806–1814. Translation by Gregory Troubetzkoy. Greenhill Books, 1999. p. 64.
 "Greatest cartooning coup of all time: The Brit who convinced everyone Napoleon was short". National Post. 28 April 2016. Retrieved 30 September 2017.
 Roberts 2004, p. 93
 Owen Connelly (2006). Blundering to Glory: Napoleon's Military Campaigns. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 7. ISBN 978-0742553187.
 "The Myth of Napoleon's Height: How a Single Image Can Change History". Entity. 13 February 2017. Archived from the original on 5 January 2018. Retrieved 4 January 2018.
 Seward, Desmond. Napoleon's Family. New York: Viking, 1986.
 The Bookman, Vol. 29, p. 304. Diary of Capt. Ross, commander of the Northumberland.
 Bordes 2007, p. 118.
 Hall 2006, p. 181
 McGraw-Hill's, US History 2012, pp. 112–13
 Blaufarb 2007, pp. 101–02
 McLynn 1998, p. 255
 Bernard Schwartz (1998). The Code Napoleon and the Common-law World. The Lawbook Exchange. p. 7. ISBN 978-1-886363-59-5. Archived from the original on 23 September 2015.
 Wood 2007, p. 55
 Scheck 2008, Chapter: The Road to National Unification
 Astarita 2005, p. 264
 Alter 2006, pp. 61–76
 Andrew Roberts, Napoleon: A Life (2014) p. xxxiii
 Robert R. Palmer and Joel Colton, A History of the Modern World (New York: McGraw Hill, 1995), pp. 428–29
 Archer et al. 2002, p. 397
 Flynn 2001, p. 16
 Bruce McConachy, "The Roots of Artillery Doctrine: Napoleonic Artillery Tactics Reconsidered", Journal of Military History 2001 65(3): 617–40. in JSTOR; online Archived 19 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine
 Archer et al. 2002, p. 383
 John Shy, "Jomini" in Peter Paret, ed. Makers of Modern Strategy: From Machiavelli to the Nuclear Age (1986).
 Archer et al. 2002, p. 380
 Roberts 2001, p. 272
 Archer et al. 2002, p. 404
 Hallock, William; Wade, Herbert T (1906). "Outlines of the evolution of weights and measures and the metric system". London: The Macmillan Company. pp. 66–69.
 Denis Février. "Un historique du mètre" (in French). Ministère de l'Economie, des Finances et de l'Industrie. Archived from the original on 28 February 2011. Retrieved 10 March 2011.
 Thierry Sabot (1 October 2000). "Les poids et mesures sous l'Ancien Régime" [The weights and measures of the Ancien Régime] (in French). histoire-genealogie. Archived from the original on 5 December 2010. Retrieved 10 February 2011.
 O'Connor 2003
 Clive Emsley (2014). Napoleon: Conquest, Reform and Reorganisation. Routledge. p. 52. ISBN 978-1317610281. Archived from the original on 18 October 2015.
 L. Pearce Williams, "Science, education and Napoleon I". Isis (1956). 369–82 in JSTOR Archived 3 December 2017 at the Wayback Machine
 L. Pearce Williams, "Science, education and Napoleon I". Isis (1956). 369–82 in JSTOR Archived 3 December 2017 at the Wayback Machine
 Margaret Bradley, "Scientific education versus military training: the influence of Napoleon Bonaparte on the École Polytechnique". Annals of science (1975) 32#5 pp. 415–49.
 Roberts 2014, pp. 278–81
 Hastings, Max (31 October 2014). "Everything is Owed to Glory". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 13 November 2014.
 Charles Esdaile, Napoleon's Wars: An International History 1803–1815 (2008), p. 39
 Colin S. Gray (2007). War, Peace and International Relations: An Introduction to Strategic History. Routledge. p. 47. ISBN 978-1-134-16951-1. Archived from the original on 20 March 2015.
 Abbott 2005, p. 3
 McLynn 1998, p. 666
 Repa, Jan (2 December 2005). "Furore over Austerlitz ceremony". BBC. Archived from the original on 20 April 2010. Retrieved 5 April 2010.
 Poulos 2000
 Geyl 1947
 Philip Dwyer, "Remembering and Forgetting in Contemporary France: Napoleon, Slavery, and the French History Wars", French Politics, Culture & Society (2008) 26#3. pp. 110–22. online
 Chandler 1973, p. xliii
 Hanson 2003
 Cronin 1994, pp. 342–43
 Correlli Barnett, Bonaparte (1978)
 Jean Tulard, Napoleon: The Myth of the Saviour (1984)
 See Bergeron, Louis (1981). France Under Napoleon. Princeton U.P. ISBN 978-0691007892.
 See Dominic Lieven, "Review article: Russia and the defeat of Napoleon." Kritika: Explorations in Russian and Eurasian History (2006) 7#2 pp. 283–308.
 Robert S. Alexander, Napoleon (Oxford University Press, 2001), examines major debates among historians.
 E.A. Arnold, "English Language Napoleonic Historiography, 1973–1998: Thoughts and Considerations". Proceedings-Western Society for French History, Vol. 26 (2000). pp. 283–94.
 John Dunne, "Recent Napoleonic Historiography: 'Poor Relation' Makes Good?" French History (2004) 18#4 pp. 484–91.
 Alan Forrest, "Propaganda and the Legitimation of Power in Napoleonic France". French History, 2004 18(4): 426–45
 Hubert N.B. Richardson, A Dictionary of Napoleon and His Times (1921) online free pp. 101–06.
 Mark, Bryant, "Broadsides against Boney." History Today 60.1 (2010): 52+
 Mark Bryant, Napoleonic Wars in Cartoons (Grub Street, 2009).
 Sudhir Hazareesingh, "Memory and Political Imagination: the Legend of Napoleon Revisited". French History, 2004 18(4): 463–83
 Venita Datta, "'L'appel Au Soldat': Visions of the Napoleonic Legend in Popular Culture of the Belle Epoque". French Historical Studies 2005 28(1): 1–30
 "Call for Papers: International Napoleonic Society, Fourth International Napoleonic Congress". La Fondation Napoléon. Archived from the original on 8 January 2009. Retrieved 27 June 2008.
 Laurent, Ottavi (8 February 2012). "A New Napoleonic Campaign for Montereau". Foundation Napoleon. Archived from the original on 29 September 2013.
 Alexander Grab, Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe (Macmillan, 2003), country by country analysis
 "Napoleonic Code". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 29 December 2011. Retrieved 13 April 2012.
 Andrzej Nieuwazny, "Napoleon and Polish identity". History Today, May 1998 vol. 48 no. 5 pp. 50–55
 McGRAW-HILL's, US History 2012, pp. 112–13
 "Biography of Joesephine de Beauharnais".
 McLynn 1998, p. 117
 McLynn 1998, p. 271
 McLynn 1998, p. 118
 McLynn 1998, p. 188
 McLynn 1998, p. 284
 McLynn 1998, p. 100
 McLynn 1998, p. 663
 McLynn 1998, p. 630
 Lucotte, Gérard; Macé, Jacques & Hrechdakian, Peter (September 2013). "Reconstruction of the Lineage Y Chromosome Haplotype of Napoléon the First" (PDF). International Journal of Sciences. 2 (9): 127–39. ISSN 2305-3925. Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 April 2014.
 McLynn 1998, p. 423
 Bouchon, Lionel A. (4 February 2017). "Genealogy of Napoleon – The Bonaparte Family". Napoleon & Empire. Archived from the original on 20 April 2017. Retrieved 24 February 2018.
References
Biographical studies
Abbott, John (2005). Life of Napoleon Bonaparte. Kessinger Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4179-7063-6.
Bell, David A. (2015). Napoleon: A Concise Biography. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-026271-6. only 140pp; by a scholar
Blaufarb, Rafe (2007). Napoleon: Symbol for an Age, A Brief History with Documents. Bedford. ISBN 978-0-312-43110-5.
Chandler, David (2002). Napoleon. Leo Cooper. ISBN 978-0-85052-750-6.
Cronin, Vincent (1994). Napoleon. HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-00-637521-0.
Dwyer, Philip (2008). Napoleon: The Path to Power. Yale University Press. ASIN B00280LN5G.
Dwyer, Philip (2013). Citizen Emperor: Napoleon in Power. Yale University Press. ASIN B00GGSG3W4.
Englund, Steven (2010). Napoleon: A Political Life. Scribner. ISBN 978-0-674-01803-7.
Gueniffey, Patrice. Bonaparte: 1769–1802 (Harvard UP, 2015, French edition 2013); 1008 pp.; vol 1 of most comprehensive recent scholarly biography by leading French specialist; less emphasis on battles and campaigns excerpt; also online review
Johnson, Paul (2002). Napoleon: A life. Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-670-03078-1.; 200 pp.; quite hostile
Lefebvre, Georges (1969). Napoleon from 18 Brumaire to Tilsit, 1799–1807. Columbia University Press. influential wide-ranging history
Lefebvre, Georges (1969). Napoleon: from Tilsit to Waterloo, 1807–1815. Columbia University Press.
Lyons, Martyn (1994). Napoleon Bonaparte and the Legacy of the French Revolution. St. Martin's Press.
Markham, Felix (1963). Napoleon. Mentor.; 303 pp.; short biography by an Oxford scholar online
McLynn, Frank (1998). Napoleon. Pimlico. ISBN 978-0-7126-6247-5. ASIN 0712662472.
Roberts, Andrew (2014). Napoleon: A Life. Penguin Group. ISBN 978-0-670-02532-9.
Thompson, J.M. (1951). Napoleon Bonaparte: His Rise and Fall. Oxford U.P., 412 pp.; by an Oxford scholar
Primary sources
Gourgaud, Gaspard (1903) [1899]. Talks of Napoleon at St. Helena. Translated from the French by Elizabeth Wormeley Latimer. Chicago: A.C. McClurg.
Specialty studies
Alder, Ken (2002). The Measure of All Things – The Seven-Year Odyssey and Hidden Error That Transformed the World. Free Press. ISBN 978-0-7432-1675-3.
Alter, Peter (2006). T. C. W. Blanning and Hagen Schulze, ed. Unity and Diversity in European Culture c. 1800. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-726382-2.
Amini, Iradj (2000). Napoleon and Persia. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-0-934211-58-1.
Archer, Christon I.; Ferris, John R.; Herwig, Holger H. (2002). World History of Warfare. University of Nebraska Press. ISBN 978-0-8032-4423-8.
Astarita, Tommaso (2005). Between Salt Water And Holy Water: A History Of Southern Italy. W.W. Norton & Company. ISBN 978-0-393-05864-2.
Bell, David (2007). The First Total War. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. ISBN 978-0-618-34965-4.
Bordes, Philippe (2007). Jacques-Louis David. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-12346-3.
Brooks, Richard (2000). Atlas of World Military History. HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-7607-2025-7.
Chandler, David (1966). The Campaigns of Napoleon. New York: Scribner. ISBN 978-0025236608. OCLC 740560411.
Chandler, David (1973) [1966]. The Campaigns of Napoleon.
Chesney, Charles (2006). Waterloo Lectures:A Study Of The Campaign Of 1815. Kessinger Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4286-4988-0.
Connelly, Owen (2006). Blundering to Glory: Napoleon's Military Campaigns. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-0-7425-5318-7.
Cordingly, David (2004). The Billy Ruffian: The Bellerophon and the Downfall of Napoleon. Bloomsbury. ISBN 978-1-58234-468-3.
Cullen, William (2008). Is Arsenic an Aphrodisiac?. Royal Society of Chemistry. ISBN 978-0-85404-363-7.
Driskel, Paul (1993). As Befits a Legend. Kent State University Press. ISBN 978-0-87338-484-1.
Flynn, George Q. (2001). Conscription and democracy: The Draft in France, Great Britain, and the United States. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-313-31912-9.
Fremont-Barnes, Gregory; Fisher, Todd (2004). The Napoleonic Wars: The Rise and Fall of an Empire. Osprey. ISBN 978-1-84176-831-1.
Fulghum, Neil (2007). "Death Mask of Napoleon". University of North Carolina. Retrieved 4 August 2008.
Gates, David (2001). The Spanish Ulcer: A History of the Peninsular War. Da Capo Press. ISBN 978-0-306-81083-1.
Gates, David (2003). The Napoleonic Wars, 1803–1815. Pimlico. ISBN 978-0-7126-0719-3.
Godechot, Jacques; et al. (1971). The Napoleonic era in Europe. Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Grab, Alexander (2003). Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe. Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-333-68275-3.
Hall, Stephen (2006). Size Matters. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. ISBN 978-0-618-47040-2.
Harvey, Robert (2006). The War of Wars. Robinson. ISBN 978-1-84529-635-3.
Hindmarsh, J. Thomas; Savory, John (2008). "The Death of Napoleon, Cancer or Arsenic?". Clinical Chemistry. 54 (12): 2092. doi:10.1373/clinchem.2008.117358. Retrieved 10 October 2010.
Karsh, Inari (2001). Empires of the Sand: The Struggle for Mastery in the Middle East, 1789–1923. Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-00541-9.
Mowat, R.B. (1924) The Diplomacy of Napoleon (1924) 350 pp. online
O'Connor, J; Robertson, E F (2003). "The history of measurement". St Andrew's University. Retrieved 18 July 2008.
Poulos, Anthi (2000). "1954 Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict". International Journal of Legal Information (vol 28 ed.). 28: 1–44. doi:10.1017/S0731126500008842.
Richardson, Hubert N.B. A Dictionary of Napoleon and His Times (1921) online free 489pp
Roberts, Chris (2004). Heavy Words Lightly Thrown. Granta. ISBN 978-1-86207-765-2.
Schom, Alan (1997). Napoleon Bonaparte. HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-017214-5.
Schroeder, Paul W. (1996). The Transformation of European Politics 1763–1848. Oxford U.P. pp. 177–560. ISBN 978-0-19-820654-5. advanced diplomatic history of Napoleon and his era
Schwarzfuchs, Simon (1979). Napoleon, the Jews and the Sanhedrin. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-19-710023-3.
Watson, William (2003). Tricolor and crescent. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-275-97470-1. Retrieved 12 June 2009.
Sicker, Martin (2001). The Islamic World in Decline: From the Treaty of Karlowitz to the Disintegration of the Ottoman Empire. Greenwood. p. 99. ISBN 978-0275968915.
Wells, David (1992). The Penguin Dictionary of Curious and Interesting Geometry. Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-14-011813-1.
Historiography and memory
Broadley, Alexander Meyrick (1911). Napoleon in Caricature 1795-1821.
Dwyer, Philip G. (2004). "Napoleon Bonaparte as Hero and Saviour: Image, Rhetoric and Behaviour in the Construction of a Legend". French History. 18 (4): 379–403. doi:10.1093/fh/18.4.379.
Dwyer, Philip (2008). "Remembering and Forgetting in Contemporary France: Napoleon, Slavery, and the French History Wars". French Politics, Culture & Society. 26 (3): 110–22. doi:10.3167/fpcs.2008.260306.
Englund, Steven. "Napoleon and Hitler". Journal of the Historical Society (2006) 6#1 pp. 151–69.
Geyl, Pieter (1982) [1947]. Napoleon For and Against. Penguin Books.
Hanson, Victor Davis (2003). "The Claremont Institute: The Little Tyrant, A review of Napoleon: A Penguin Life". The Claremont Institute.
Hazareesingh, Sudhir (2005). The Legend of Napoleon. excerpt and text search
Hazareesingh, Sudhir. "Memory and Political Imagination: The Legend of Napoleon Revisited", French History (2004) 18#4 pp. 463–83.
Hazareesingh, Sudhir (2005). "Napoleonic Memory in Nineteenth-Century France: The Making of a Liberal Legend". MLN. 120 (4): 747–73. doi:10.1353/mln.2005.0119.
External links
Napoleon Bonaparte
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Resources from Wikiversity
The Napoleonic Guide
Napoleon Series
International Napoleonic Society
Biography by the US Public Broadcasting Service
Newspaper clippings about Napoleon in the 20th Century Press Archives of the German National Library of Economics (ZBW)
Napoleon I of France
House of Bonaparte
Born: 15 August 1769 Died: 5 May 1821
Political offices
New title
Directory dissolved
Provisional Consul of the French Republic
11 November – 12 December 1799 
Served alongside: 
Roger Ducos and Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès	Became First Consul
New title
Consulate established
First Consul of the French Republic
12 December 1799 – 18 May 1804 
Served alongside: 
Jean Jacques Régis de Cambacérès (Second Consul)
Charles-François Lebrun (Third Consul)	Became Emperor
New title
Italian Republic established
President of the Italian Republic
26 January 1802 – 17 March 1805	Vacant
(Became King)
Title next held by
Enrico De Nicola
New title
Helvetic Republic dissolved
Mediator of the Swiss Confederation
19 February 1803 – 19 October 1813	New Confederation established
Regnal titles
Vacant
French Revolution
Title last held by
Louis XVI
as King of the French	Emperor of the French
18 May 1804 – 11 April 1814	Succeeded by
Louis XVIII
as King of France and Navarre
Vacant
Title last held by
Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor
as last crowned monarch, 1530	King of Italy
17 March 1805 – 11 April 1814	Vacant
Title next held by
Victor Emmanuel II of Savoy
Vacant
Title last held by
Louis XVI	Co-Prince of Andorra
1806 – 11 April 1814	Succeeded by
Louis XVIII
New title
State created
Protector of the Confederation of the Rhine
12 July 1806 – 19 October 1813	Confederation dissolved
successive ruler:
Francis I of Austria
as Head of the Präsidialmacht Austria
New title	Sovereign of the Island of Elba
11 April 1814 – 20 March 1815	Relinquished title
Preceded by
Louis XVIII
as King of France and Navarre	Emperor of the French
Co-Prince of Andorra
20 March – 22 June 1815	Succeeded by
Louis XVIII
as King of France and Navarre
(Napoleon II according to his will only)
Titles in pretence
New title	— TITULAR —
Emperor of the French
11 April 1814 – 20 March 1815	Vacant
Title next held by
Napoleon II
vte
Napoleonic Wars
Third Coalition Fourth Coalition Peninsular War Fifth Coalition French Invasion of Russia Sixth Coalition Seventh Coalition
Belli-
gerents	
France,
client states
and allies	
France Polish Legions Italy Holland Etruria Swiss Confederation Naples Confederation of the Rhine Bavaria Saxony Westphalia Württemberg Denmark–Norway Ottoman Empire Persia Spain
Coalition
forces	
United Kingdom Austria Russia Prussia Spain Portugal Sicily Papal States Ottoman Empire Persia Sardinia Sweden Netherlands Brunswick Hanover Nassau French Royalists
Major
battles	
Prelude	
French Revolution First Coalition Second Coalition 18 Brumaire Planned invasion of the United Kingdom Duc d'Enghien Execution Coronation of Napoleon
1805	
Diamond Rock Cape Finisterre Wertingen Günzburg Haslach-Jungingen Elchingen Ulm Verona Trafalgar Caldiero Cape Ortegal Amstetten Dürenstein Schöngrabern Austerlitz
1806	
Gaeta Campo Tenese Maida Schleiz Saalfeld Jena–Auerstedt Erfurt Halle Magdeburg Prenzlau Pasewalk Stettin Waren-Nossentin Lübeck Greater Poland uprising Hamelin Czarnowo Golymin Pułtusk
1807	
Mohrungen Stralsund Eylau Ostrołęka Kolberg Danzig Mileto Guttstadt-Deppen Heilsberg Friedland Copenhagen Invasion of Portugal
1808	
Dos de Mayo Bruch Rosily Squadron Cabezón 1st Zaragoza Valencia Medina de Rioseco Bailén Roliça Vimeiro Pancorbo Valmaseda Burgos Espinosa Tudela Somosierra 2nd Zaragoza Sahagún Benavente
1809	
Castellón Uclés Corunna Valls Tyrolean Rebellion Villafranca Yevenes/Yébenes Ciudad Real 1st Porto Medellín Bergisel Sacile Teugen-Hausen Raszyn Abensberg Landshut Eckmühl Ratisbon Neumarkt-Sankt Veit Dalmatian Campaign Ebelsberg Gerona Piave River Grijó 2nd Porto Wörgl Tarvis Aspern-Essling Alcañiz Sankt Michael Stralsund Raab María Graz Wagram Korneuburg Stockerau Gefrees Hollabrunn Schöngrabern Armistice of Znaim Talavera Walcheren Campaign Ölper Almonacid Tamames Ocaña Alba de Tormes
1810	
Cádiz Astorga Ciudad Rodrigo Barquilla Côa Almeida Bussaco
1811	
Gebora Barrosa Pombal Redinha Casal Novo Campo Maior Sabugal Almeida Fuentes de Oñoro Tarragona Albuera Usagre Saguntum Arroyo dos Molinos Valencia
1812	
Ciudad Rodrigo Badajoz Villagarcia Almaraz Maguilla Mir Ekau Salamanca García Hernández Saltanovka Ostrovno Vitebsk Kobryn Klyastitsy Majadahonda Gorodechno Smolensk 1st Polotsk Valutino Mesoten Borodino Burgos Tarutino 2nd Polotsk Venta del Pozo Maloyaroslavets Chashniki Vyazma Smoliani Krasnoi Berezina
1813	
Castalla Lützen Bautzen Tarragona Luckau Vitoria San Sebastián Pyrenees Sorauren Großbeeren Katzbach Dresden 1st Kulm San Marcial Dennewitz 2nd Kulm Göhrde Bidassoa Leipzig Hanau Nivelle Bornhöved Sehested
1814	
Brienne La Rothière Mincio River Champaubert Montmirail Château-Thierry Vauchamps Garris Mormant Montereau Orthez Bar-sur-Aube Laon Reims Craonne Arcis-sur-Aube Fère-Champenoise Saint-Dizier Montmartre Paris Toulouse Bayonne
1815	
Panaro Occhiobello Carpi Casaglia Ronco Cesenatico Pesaro Scapezzano Tolentino Ancona Castel di Sangro San Germano Gaeta Quatre Bras Ligny Waterloo Wavre Rocheserviere La Suffel Rocquencourt Issy
Info	
French and ally
military and
political leaders	
Napoleon Louis-Alexandre Berthier Joachim Murat Louis-Nicolas Davout Jean Lannes Auguste de Marmont André Masséna Michel Ney Jean-de-Dieu Soult Marshal Victor Jean-Baptiste Bessières Pierre-Charles Villeneuve Joseph I Louis Bonaparte Jérôme Bonaparte Prince Poniatowski Prince Eugène Maximilian I Joseph of Bavaria Frederick Augustus I of Saxony Frederick I of Württemberg Frederick VI of Denmark
Coalition
military and
political leaders	
Duke of Wellington Rowland Hill John Moore Horatio Nelson Thomas Cochrane Francis II, Holy Roman Emperor Manuel Lapeña Archduke Charles Prince von Schwarzenberg Archduke John of Austria Alexander I of Russia Mikhail Kutuzov Michael Andreas Barclay de Tolly Count Bennigsen Pyotr Bagration Frederick William III of Prussia Gebhard von Blücher Duke of Brunswick Prince of Hohenlohe Ferdinand VII of Spain Miguel de Álava Maria I of Portugal Prince Regent John of Portugal Count of Feira William, Prince of Orange Ferdinand I of the Two Sicilies Gustav IV Adolf of Sweden Prince Charles John of Sweden Louis XVIII of France
Related
conflicts	
Anglo-Russian War Anglo-Spanish War Anglo-Swedish War Anglo-Turkish War English Wars Gunboat War Dano-Swedish War Finnish War Pomeranian War (Franco-Swedish War) Russo-Persian War Russo-Turkish War Spanish American wars of independence Swedish–Norwegian War War of 1812
Treaties	
Campo Formio Lunéville Amiens Artlenburg Pressburg Finckenstein Tilsit Cintra Schönbrunn Paris (1810) Paris (1812) Tauroggen Ried Chaumont Kiel Mantua Casalanza Paris (1815)
Miscellaneous	
Bibliography Bourbon Restoration Casualties Congress of Erfurt Continental System Conference of Dresden England expects that every man will do his duty Grande Armée Longwood House
Portal Portal
vte
French Revolution
Causes Timeline Ancien Régime Revolution Constitutional monarchy Republic Directory Consulate Glossary Journals Museum
Significant civil and political events by year
1788	
Day of the Tiles (7 Jun 1788) Assembly of Vizille (21 Jul 1788)
1789	
What Is the Third Estate? (Jan 1789) Réveillon riots (28 Apr 1789) Convocation of the Estates-General (5 May 1789) Death of the Dauphin (4 June 1789) National Assembly (17 Jun – 9 Jul 1790) Tennis Court Oath (20 Jun 1789) National Constituent Assembly (9 Jul – 30 Sep 1791) Storming of the Bastille (14 Jul 1789) Great Fear (20 Jul – 5 Aug 1789) Abolition of Feudalism (4-11 Aug 1789) Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen (27 Aug 1789) Women's March on Versailles (5 Oct 1789)
1790	
Abolition of the Parlements (Feb–Jul 1790) Abolition of the Nobility (19 Jun 1790) Civil Constitution of the Clergy (12 Jul 1790) Fête de la Fédération (14 Jul 1790)
1791	
Flight to Varennes (20–21 Jun 1791) Champ de Mars Massacre (17 Jul 1791) Declaration of Pillnitz (27 Aug 1791) The Constitution of 1791 (3 Sep 1791) Legislative Assembly (1 Oct 1791 – Sep 1792)
1792	
France declares war (20 Apr 1792) Brunswick Manifesto (25 Jul 1792) Paris Commune becomes insurrectionary (Jun 1792) 10th of August (10 Aug 1792) September Massacres (Sep 1792) National Convention (20 Sep 1792 – 26 Oct 1795) First republic declared (22 Sep 1792)
1793	
Execution of Louis XVI (21 Jan 1793) Revolutionary Tribunal (9 Mar 1793 – 31 May 1795) Reign of Terror (27 Jun 1793 – 27 Jul 1794) Committee of Public Safety Committee of General Security Fall of the Girondists (2 Jun 1793) Assassination of Marat (13 Jul 1793) Levée en masse (23 Aug 1793) The Death of Marat (painting) Law of Suspects (17 Sep 1793) Marie Antoinette is guillotined (16 Oct 1793) Anti-clerical laws (throughout the year)
1794	
Danton and Desmoulins guillotined (5 Apr 1794) Law of 22 Prairial (10 Jun 1794) Thermidorian Reaction (27 Jul 1794) Robespierre guillotined (28 Jul 1794) White Terror (Fall 1794) Closing of the Jacobin Club (11 Nov 1794)
1795	
Constitution of the Year III (22 Aug 1795) Conspiracy of the Equals (Nov 1795) Directoire (1795–99) Council of Five Hundred Council of Ancients 13 Vendémiaire 5 Oct 1795
1797	
Coup of 18 Fructidor (4 Sep 1797) Second Congress of Rastatt (Dec 1797)
1799	
Coup of 30 Prairial VII (18 Jun 1799) Coup of 18 Brumaire (9 Nov 1799) Constitution of the Year VIII (24 Dec 1799) Consulate
Revolutionary campaigns
1792	
Verdun Thionville Valmy Royalist Revolts Chouannerie Vendée Dauphiné Lille Siege of Mainz Jemappes Namur [fr]
1793	
First Coalition Siege of Toulon (18 Sep – 18 Dec 1793) War in the Vendée Battle of Neerwinden) Battle of Famars (23 May 1793) Expédition de Sardaigne (21 Dec 1792 - 25 May 1793) Battle of Kaiserslautern Siege of Mainz Battle of Wattignies Battle of Hondschoote Siege of Bellegarde Battle of Peyrestortes (Pyrenees) First Battle of Wissembourg (13 Oct 1793) Battle of Truillas (Pyrenees) Second Battle of Wissembourg (26–27 Dec 1793)
1794	
Battle of Villers-en-Cauchies (24 Apr 1794) Battle of Boulou (Pyrenees) (30 Apr – 1 May 1794) Battle of Tournay (22 May 1794) Battle of Fleurus (26 Jun 1794) Chouannerie Battle of Tourcoing (18 May 1794) Battle of Aldenhoven (2 Oct 1794)
1795	
Peace of Basel
1796	
Battle of Lonato (3–4 Aug 1796) Battle of Castiglione (5 Aug 1796) Battle of Theiningen Battle of Neresheim (11 Aug 1796) Battle of Amberg (24 Aug 1796) Battle of Würzburg (3 Sep 1796) Battle of Rovereto (4 Sep 1796) First Battle of Bassano (8 Sep 1796) Battle of Emmendingen (19 Oct 1796) Battle of Schliengen (26 Oct 1796) Second Battle of Bassano (6 Nov 1796) Battle of Calliano (6–7 Nov 1796) Battle of the Bridge of Arcole (15–17 Nov 1796) The Ireland Expedition (Dec 1796)
1797	
Naval Engagement off Brittany (13 Jan 1797) Battle of Rivoli (14–15 Jan 1797) Battle of the Bay of Cádiz (25 Jan 1797) Treaty of Leoben (17 Apr 1797) Battle of Neuwied (18 Apr 1797) Treaty of Campo Formio (17 Oct 1797)
1798	
French invasion of Switzerland (28 January – 17 May 1798) French Invasion of Egypt (1798–1801) Irish Rebellion of 1798 (23 May – 23 Sep 1798) Quasi-War (1798–1800) Peasants' War (12 Oct – 5 Dec 1798)
1799	
Second Coalition (1798–1802) Siege of Acre (20 Mar – 21 May 1799) Battle of Ostrach (20–21 Mar 1799) Battle of Stockach (25 Mar 1799) Battle of Magnano (5 Apr 1799) Battle of Cassano (27 Apr 1799) First Battle of Zurich (4–7 Jun 1799) Battle of Trebbia (19 Jun 1799) Battle of Novi (15 Aug 1799) Second Battle of Zurich (25–26 Sep 1799)
1800	
Battle of Marengo (14 Jun 1800) Convention of Alessandria (15 Jun 1800) Battle of Hohenlinden (3 Dec 1800) League of Armed Neutrality (1800–02)
1801	
Treaty of Lunéville (9 Feb 1801) Treaty of Florence (18 Mar 1801) Algeciras Campaign (8 Jul 1801)
1802	
Treaty of Amiens (25 Mar 1802)
Military leaders
France French Army	
Eustache Charles d'Aoust Pierre Augereau Alexandre de Beauharnais Jean-Baptiste Bernadotte Louis-Alexandre Berthier Jean-Baptiste Bessières Guillaume-Marie-Anne Brune Jean François Carteaux Jean Étienne Championnet Chapuis de Tourville Adam Philippe, Comte de Custine Louis-Nicolas Davout Louis Desaix Jacques François Dugommier Thomas-Alexandre Dumas Charles François Dumouriez Pierre Marie Barthélemy Ferino Louis-Charles de Flers Paul Grenier Emmanuel de Grouchy Jacques Maurice Hatry Lazare Hoche Jean-Baptiste Jourdan François Christophe de Kellermann Jean-Baptiste Kléber Pierre Choderlos de Laclos Jean Lannes Charles Leclerc Claude Lecourbe François Joseph Lefebvre Jacques MacDonald Jean-Antoine Marbot Jean Baptiste de Marbot François Séverin Marceau-Desgraviers Auguste de Marmont André Masséna Bon-Adrien Jeannot de Moncey Jean Victor Marie Moreau Édouard Mortier, duc de Trévise Joachim Murat Michel Ney Pierre-Jacques Osten [fr] Nicolas Oudinot Catherine-Dominique de Pérignon Jean-Charles Pichegru Józef Poniatowski Laurent de Gouvion Saint-Cyr Barthélemy Louis Joseph Schérer Jean-Mathieu-Philibert Sérurier Joseph Souham Jean-de-Dieu Soult Louis-Gabriel Suchet Belgrand de Vaubois Claude Victor-Perrin, Duc de Belluno
France French Navy	
Charles-Alexandre Linois
Opposition	
Austrian Empire Austria	
József Alvinczi Archduke Charles, Duke of Teschen Count of Clerfayt (Walloon) Karl Aloys zu Fürstenberg Friedrich Freiherr von Hotze (Swiss) Friedrich Adolf, Count von Kalckreuth Pál Kray (Hungarian) Charles Eugene, Prince of Lambesc (French) Maximilian Baillet de Latour (Walloon) Karl Mack von Leiberich Rudolf Ritter von Otto (Saxon) Prince Josias of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld Peter Vitus von Quosdanovich Prince Heinrich XV of Reuss-Plauen Johann Mészáros von Szoboszló (Hungarian) Karl Philipp Sebottendorf Dagobert von Wurmser
Kingdom of Great Britain Britain	
Sir Ralph Abercromby Admiral Sir James Saumarez Admiral Sir Edward Pellew Prince Frederick, Duke of York and Albany
Dutch Republic Dutch Republic	
William V, Prince of Orange
 Prussia	
Charles William Ferdinand, Duke of Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel Frederick Louis, Prince of Hohenlohe-Ingelfingen
Russian Empire Russia	
Alexander Korsakov Alexander Suvorov
Spain Spain	
Luis Firmin de Carvajal Antonio Ricardos
Other significant figures and factions
Society of 1789	
Jean Sylvain Bailly Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette François Alexandre Frédéric, duc de la Rochefoucauld-Liancourt Isaac René Guy le Chapelier Honoré Gabriel Riqueti, comte de Mirabeau Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès Charles-Maurice de Talleyrand-Périgord Nicolas de Condorcet
Feuillants
and monarchiens
Madame de Lamballe Madame du Barry Louis de Breteuil Loménie de Brienne Charles Alexandre de Calonne de Chateaubriand Jean Chouan Grace Elliott Arnaud de La Porte Jean-Sifrein Maury Jacques Necker François-Marie, marquis de Barthélemy Guillaume-Mathieu Dumas Antoine Barnave Lafayette Alexandre-Théodore-Victor, comte de Lameth Charles Malo François Lameth André Chénier Jean-François Rewbell Camille Jordan Madame de Staël Boissy d'Anglas Jean-Charles Pichegru Pierre Paul Royer-Collard
Girondists	
Jacques Pierre Brissot Roland de La Platière Madame Roland Father Henri Grégoire Étienne Clavière Marquis de Condorcet Charlotte Corday Marie Jean Hérault Jean Baptiste Treilhard Pierre Victurnien Vergniaud Bertrand Barère de Vieuzac Jérôme Pétion de Villeneuve Jean Debry Jean-Jacques Duval d'Eprémesnil Olympe de Gouges Jean-Baptiste Robert Lindet Louis Marie de La Révellière-Lépeaux
The Plain	
Abbé Sieyès de Cambacérès Charles François Lebrun Lazare Nicolas Marguerite Carnot Philippe Égalité Louis Philippe I Mirabeau Antoine Christophe Merlin de Thionville Jean Joseph Mounier Pierre Samuel du Pont de Nemours François de Neufchâteau
Montagnards	
Maximilien Robespierre Georges Danton Jean-Paul Marat Camille Desmoulins Louis Antoine de Saint-Just Paul Nicolas, vicomte de Barras Louis Philippe I Louis Michel le Peletier de Saint-Fargeau Jacques-Louis David Marquis de Sade Georges Couthon Roger Ducos Jean-Marie Collot d'Herbois Jean-Henri Voulland Philippe-Antoine Merlin de Douai Antoine Quentin Fouquier-Tinville Philippe-François-Joseph Le Bas Marc-Guillaume Alexis Vadier Jean-Pierre-André Amar Prieur de la Côte-d'Or Prieur de la Marne Gilbert Romme Jean Bon Saint-André Jean-Lambert Tallien Pierre Louis Prieur Bertrand Barère de Vieuzac Antoine Christophe Saliceti
Hébertists
and Enragés	
Jacques Hébert Jacques Nicolas Billaud-Varenne Pierre Gaspard Chaumette Charles-Philippe Ronsin Antoine-François Momoro François-Nicolas Vincent François Chabot Jean Baptiste Noël Bouchotte Jean-Baptiste-Joseph Gobel François Hanriot Jacques Roux Stanislas-Marie Maillard Charles-Philippe Ronsin Jean-François Varlet Theophile Leclerc Claire Lacombe Pauline Léon Gracchus Babeuf Sylvain Maréchal
Others	
Charles X Louis XVI Louis XVII Louis XVIII Louis Antoine, Duke of Enghien Louis Henri, Prince of Condé Louis Joseph, Prince of Condé Marie Antoinette Napoléon Bonaparte Lucien Bonaparte Joseph Bonaparte Joseph Fesch Joséphine de Beauharnais Joachim Murat Jean Sylvain Bailly Jacques-Donatien Le Ray Guillaume-Chrétien de Malesherbes Talleyrand Thérésa Tallien Gui-Jean-Baptiste Target Catherine Théot List of people associated with the French Revolution
Influential thinkers
Les Lumières Beaumarchais Edmund Burke Anacharsis Cloots Charles-Augustin de Coulomb Pierre Claude François Daunou Diderot Benjamin Franklin Thomas Jefferson Antoine Lavoisier Montesquieu Thomas Paine Jean-Jacques Rousseau Abbé Sieyès Voltaire Mary Wollstonecraft
Cultural impact
La Marseillaise French Tricolour Liberté, égalité, fraternité Marianne Bastille Day Panthéon French Republican Calendar Cult of the Supreme Being Cult of Reason Temple of Reason Sans-culottes Metric system Phrygian cap Women in the French Revolution Symbolism in the French Revolution Historiography of the French Revolution Influence of the French Revolution
vte
Imperial House of France of the First French Empire
Emperor and immediate family	
Napoleon, Emperor of the French Joséphine, Empress of the French Marie Louise, Empress of the French Napoleon, King of Rome
Imperial Coat of Arms of France (1804-1815).svg
French Princes	
Joseph Bonaparte Louis Bonaparte Joachim Murat Eugène de Beauharnais Elisa Bonaparte Jérôme Bonaparte Joseph Fesch Lucien Bonaparte
Several family members held additional titles in vassal states
vte
Bonaparte family
vte
Heads of state of France
Recognized as Francia from 481 to 843 – Recognized as West Francia from 843 to 987 – Recognized as France from 987 to present
Styled President of the Republic after 1871, except from 1940 to 1944 (Chief of State) and 1944 to 1947 (Chairman of the Provisional Government).
Detailed monarch family tree | Simplified monarch family tree
Merovingians (486–751)	
Clovis I Childebert I Chlothar I Charibert I Guntram Chilperic I Sigebert I Childebert II Chlothar II Dagobert I Sigebert II Clovis II Chlothar III Childeric II Theuderic III Clovis IV Childebert III Dagobert III Chilperic II Chlothar IV Theuderic IV Childeric III
Carolingians,
Robertians and Bosonids (751–987)	
Pepin the Short Carloman I Charlemagne (Charles I) Louis I Charles II Louis II Louis III Carloman II Charles the Fat OdoR Charles III Robert IR RudolphB Louis IV Lothair Louis V
House of Capet (987–1328)	
Hugh Capet Robert II Henry I Philip I Louis VI Louis VII Philip II Louis VIII Louis IX Philip III Philip IV Louis X John I Philip V Charles IV
House of Valois (1328–1589)	
Philip VI John II Charles V Charles VI Charles VII Louis XI Charles VIII Louis XII Francis I Henry II Francis II Charles IX Henry III
House of Lancaster (1422–1453)	
Henry VI of England
House of Bourbon (1589–1792)	
Henry IV Louis XIII Louis XIV Louis XV Louis XVI Louis XVII
First Republic (1792–1804)	
National Convention Directory Consulate
First Empire (1804–1815)	
Napoleon I Napoleon II
Bourbon Restoration (1815–1830)	
Louis XVIII Charles X Louis XIX Henry V
July Monarchy (1830–1848)	
Louis Philippe I
Second Republic (1848–1852)	
Jacques-Charles Dupont de l'Eure Executive Commission Louis-Eugène Cavaignac Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte
Second Empire (1852–1870)	
Napoleon III
Government of National Defense (1870–1871)	
Louis-Jules Trochu
Third Republic (1871–1940)	
Adolphe Thiers Patrice de Mac-Mahon Jules Armand Dufaure* Jules Grévy Maurice Rouvier* Sadi Carnot Charles Dupuy* Jean Casimir-Perier Charles Dupuy* Félix Faure Charles Dupuy* Émile Loubet Armand Fallières Raymond Poincaré Paul Deschanel Alexandre Millerand Frédéric François-Marsal* Gaston Doumergue Paul Doumer André Tardieu* Albert Lebrun
Vichy France (1940–1944)	
Philippe Pétain
Provisional Government (1944–1947)	
Charles de Gaulle Félix Gouin Georges Bidault Vincent Auriol Léon Blum
Fourth Republic (1947–1958)	
Vincent Auriol René Coty
Fifth Republic (1958–present)	
Charles de Gaulle Alain Poher* Georges Pompidou Alain Poher* Valéry Giscard d'Estaing François Mitterrand Jacques Chirac Nicolas Sarkozy François Hollande Emmanuel Macron
Debatable or disputed rulers are in italics. Acting heads of state are denoted by an asterisk*. Millerand held the presidency in an acting capacity before being fully elected.
vte
German Confederations (1806–1871)
Confederation of the Rhine
Flag of France.svg 1806–1813	
Protector	
Napoleon I (1806–1813)
Prince primate	
Karl Theodor von Dalberg (1806–1813) Eugène de Beauharnais (1813)
German Confederation
Flag of Germany (3-2 aspect ratio).svg 1815–1866	
Presidents	
Francis I of Austria (1815–1835) Ferdinand I of Austria (1835–1848) Francis Joseph I of Austria (1850–1866)
Imperial regent	
Archduke Johann of Austria (1848–1849)
North German Confederation
Flag of the German Empire.svg 1867–1871	
President	
Wilhelm I of Prussia (1867–1871)
Chancellor	
Otto von Bismarck (1867–1871)
List of German monarchs History of Germany House of Habsburg-Lorraine House of Hohenzollern
vte
Pretenders to the French throne since 1792
Monarchy in exile (1792–1815)	
1792 Louis XVI 1793 Louis XVII 1795 Louis XVIII 1814 1815
Coat of arms of the House of Bourbon
Coat of arms of the House of Orléans
Imperial Eagle of the House of Bonaparte
Legitimist pretenders (1830–present)	
1830 Charles X 1836 Louis Antoine 1844 Henri 1883 Jean 1887 Charles 1909 Jacques 1931 Alphonse Charles 1936 Alphonse 1941 Jacques 1975 Alphonse 1989 Louis Alphonse present
Orléanist pretenders (1848–present)	
1848 Louis Philippe I 1850 Philippe 1894 Philippe 1926 Jean 1940 Henri 1999 Henri 2019 Jean present
Unionist succession (1830–present)	
1830 Charles X 1836 Louis Antoine 1844 Henri 1883 Philippe 1894 Philippe 1926 Jean 1940 Henri 1999 Henri 2019 Jean present
Bonapartist Prince Imperial (1814–present)	
1814 1815 Napoléon I 1821 Napoléon II 1832 Joseph 1844 Louis 1846 Napoléon III (Emperor 1852–1870) 1873 Napoléon 1879 Victor 1926 Louis 1997 Charles / Jean-Christophe present (disputed)
Bonapartist Prince Canino (1832–1924)	
1832 Lucien 1840 Charles 1857 Joseph 1865 Lucien 1895 Napoléon Charles 1899 Roland 1924
vte
Heads of state of France
Recognized as Francia from 481 to 843 – Recognized as West Francia from 843 to 987 – Recognized as France from 987 to present
Styled President of the Republic after 1871, except from 1940 to 1944 (Chief of State) and 1944 to 1947 (Chairman of the Provisional Government).
Detailed monarch family tree | Simplified monarch family tree
Merovingians (486–751)	
Clovis I Childebert I Chlothar I Charibert I Guntram Chilperic I Sigebert I Childebert II Chlothar II Dagobert I Sigebert II Clovis II Chlothar III Childeric II Theuderic III Clovis IV Childebert III Dagobert III Chilperic II Chlothar IV Theuderic IV Childeric III
Carolingians,
Robertians and Bosonids (751–987)	
Pepin the Short Carloman I Charlemagne (Charles I) Louis I Charles II Louis II Louis III Carloman II Charles the Fat OdoR Charles III Robert IR RudolphB Louis IV Lothair Louis V
House of Capet (987–1328)	
Hugh Capet Robert II Henry I Philip I Louis VI Louis VII Philip II Louis VIII Louis IX Philip III Philip IV Louis X John I Philip V Charles IV
House of Valois (1328–1589)	
Philip VI John II Charles V Charles VI Charles VII Louis XI Charles VIII Louis XII Francis I Henry II Francis II Charles IX Henry III
House of Lancaster (1422–1453)	
Henry VI of England
House of Bourbon (1589–1792)	
Henry IV Louis XIII Louis XIV Louis XV Louis XVI Louis XVII
First Republic (1792–1804)	
National Convention Directory Consulate
First Empire (1804–1815)	
Napoleon I Napoleon II
Bourbon Restoration (1815–1830)	
Louis XVIII Charles X Louis XIX Henry V
July Monarchy (1830–1848)	
Louis Philippe I
Second Republic (1848–1852)	
Jacques-Charles Dupont de l'Eure Executive Commission Louis-Eugène Cavaignac Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte
Second Empire (1852–1870)	
Napoleon III
Government of National Defense (1870–1871)	
Louis-Jules Trochu
Third Republic (1871–1940)	
Adolphe Thiers Patrice de Mac-Mahon Jules Armand Dufaure* Jules Grévy Maurice Rouvier* Sadi Carnot Charles Dupuy* Jean Casimir-Perier Charles Dupuy* Félix Faure Charles Dupuy* Émile Loubet Armand Fallières Raymond Poincaré Paul Deschanel Alexandre Millerand Frédéric François-Marsal* Gaston Doumergue Paul Doumer André Tardieu* Albert Lebrun
Vichy France (1940–1944)	
Philippe Pétain
Provisional Government (1944–1947)	
Charles de Gaulle Félix Gouin Georges Bidault Vincent Auriol Léon Blum
Fourth Republic (1947–1958)	
Vincent Auriol René Coty
Fifth Republic (1958–present)	
Charles de Gaulle Alain Poher* Georges Pompidou Alain Poher* Valéry Giscard d'Estaing François Mitterrand Jacques Chirac Nicolas Sarkozy François Hollande Emmanuel Macron
Debatable or disputed rulers are in italics. Acting heads of state are denoted by an asterisk*. Millerand held the presidency in an acting capacity before being fully elected.
vte
French Consulate (10 November 1799 – 18 May 1804)
Provisional consuls	
Napoleon Bonaparte Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès Roger Ducos
Bonabarte Premier consul.jpg
Bonaparte
First Consul
Consuls	
Napoleon Bonaparte Jean Jacques Régis de Cambacérès Charles-François Lebrun, duc de Plaisance
Ministers	
Foreign Affairs	
Charles-Frédéric Reinhard Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-Périgord
Justice	
Jean Jacques Régis de Cambacérès André Joseph Abrial Claude Ambroise Régnier
War	
Louis-Alexandre Berthier Lazare Carnot Louis-Alexandre Berthier
Finance	
Martin-Michel-Charles Gaudin
Police	
Joseph Fouché
Interior	
Pierre-Simon Laplace Lucien Bonaparte Jean-Antoine Chaptal
Navy and Colonies	
Marc Antoine Bourdon de Vatry Pierre-Alexandre-Laurent Forfait Denis Decrès
Secretary of State	
Hugues-Bernard Maret, duc de Bassano
Treasury	
François Barbé-Marbois
War Administration	
Jean François Aimé Dejean
Preceded by French Directory Followed by First cabinet of Napoleon
Authority control Edit this at Wikidata	
BIBSYS: 90272048 BNE: XX954040 BNF: cb12008245w (data) BPN: 55397934 GND: 118586408 HDS: 41455 ISNI: 0000 0001 2283 8283 LCCN: n79054933 LIR: 1735 LNB: 000029293 NARA: 12012599 NDL: 00450992 NKC: jn20000604140 NLA: 35372777 NSK: 000042500 RKD: 434741 ICCU: IT\ICCU\CFIV\096977 SELIBR: 207147 SNAC: w6qw49k5 SUDOC: 02733791X ULAN: 500122388 VIAF: 106964661 WorldCat Identities (via VIAF): 106964661
Categories: Napoleon1769 births1821 deaths18th-century rulers in Europe18th-century heads of state of France19th-century monarchs in Europe19th-century French monarchs19th-century Princes of Andorra19th-century Kings of ItalyAmateur mathematiciansFrench art collectorsCharacters in War and PeaceCorsican politiciansDeaths from stomach cancerFrench commanders of the Napoleonic WarsFrench emperorsFrench exilesFrench military leaders of the French Revolutionary WarsFrench people of Italian descentFrench Roman CatholicsHouse of BonaparteKings of ItalyLeaders who took power by coupMembers of the French Academy of SciencesMonarchs imprisoned and detained during warDethroned monarchsMonarchs who abdicatedSelf-proclaimed monarchyPeople from AjaccioPeople of the First French EmpirePeople of Tuscan descentPrinces of AndorraPeople temporarily excommunicated by the Roman Catholic ChurchFrench Consulate
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadView sourceView historySearch
Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Wikiquote
Wikisource
Languages
Acèh
Адыгэбзэ
Afrikaans
Alemannisch
አማርኛ
Ænglisc
Аҧсшәа
العربية
Aragonés
ܐܪܡܝܐ
অসমীয়া
Asturianu
Azərbaycanca
تۆرکجه
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Башҡортса
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎
Bikol Central
Български
Boarisch
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Буряад
Català
Чӑвашла
Cebuano
Čeština
Chavacano de Zamboanga
Chi-Chewa
Corsu
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
डोटेली
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Emiliàn e rumagnòl
Español
Esperanto
Estremeñu
Euskara
Eʋegbe
فارسی
Fiji Hindi
Føroyskt
Français
Frysk
Furlan
Gaeilge
Gàidhlig
Galego
贛語
Gĩkũyũ
ગુજરાતી
客家語/Hak-kâ-ngî
한국어
Hausa
Հայերեն
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Ido
Ilokano
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
Kabɩyɛ
ಕನ್ನಡ
ქართული
Қазақша
Kiswahili
Kreyòl ayisyen
Kurdî
Кыргызча
Ladino
ລາວ
لۊری شومالی
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Лезги
Lietuvių
Ligure
Limburgs
Lingua Franca Nova
Livvinkarjala
La .lojban.
Luganda
Lumbaart
Magyar
मैथिली
Македонски
Malagasy
മലയാളം
Malti
मराठी
მარგალური
مصرى
مازِرونی
Bahasa Melayu
Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄
Mirandés
Монгол
မြန်မာဘာသာ
Dorerin Naoero
Nederlands
Nedersaksies
नेपाली
日本語
Napulitano
Нохчийн
Nordfriisk
Norsk
Norsk nynorsk
Occitan
ଓଡ଼ିଆ
Oromoo
Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча
ਪੰਜਾਬੀ
پنجابی
پښتو
Patois
ភាសាខ្មែរ
Picard
Piemontèis
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Qaraqalpaqsha
Ripoarisch
Română
Rumantsch
Runa Simi
Русиньскый
Русский
Саха тыла
ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ
Gagana Samoa
संस्कृतम्
Sardu
Scots
Seeltersk
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
سنڌي
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Ślůnski
Soomaaliga
کوردی
Српски / srpski
Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
Basa Sunda
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
Татарча/tatarça
తెలుగు
ไทย
Türkçe
Twi
Тыва дыл
Удмурт
Українська
اردو
ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche
Vèneto
Vepsän kel’
Tiếng Việt
Võro
Walon
文言
West-Vlams
Winaray
吴语
ייִדיש
Yorùbá
粵語
Zazaki
Zeêuws
Žemaitėška
中文
Edit links
This page was last edited on 18 March 2019, at 16:11 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki